CHAPTER 1 ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS OF THE CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS COMMISSION

ARTICLE 1 GENERAL

1-101. Abbreviations.

The following abbreviations shall apply to Title 24, California Code of Regulations. Abbreviations may also be provided in each of the other 12 parts of Title 24. If an abbreviation in this section conflicts with an abbreviation within another part of Title 24, the abbreviation reference in the other part shall prevail within that part.

Note: For information regarding the code provisions adopted for a state agency and the application of such code provisions, see the agency administrative chapters in the appropriate parts of Title 24, California Code of Regulations.

AGR	Department of Food and Agriculture
BSC	Identifies code provisions by the Building Standards Commission
BSC-CG	Identifies the California Green Building Standards Code (CALGreen) provisions by BSC
BSCC	Identifies code provisions by the Board of State and Community Corrections
CA	Department of Consumer Affairs
CALGreen	California Green Building Standards Code (CALGreen), Part 11 of Title 24
CBC	California Building Code (Part 2 of Title 24)
CCR	California Code of Regulations
CEBC	California Existing Building Code (Part 10 of Title 24)
CEC	California Electrical Code (Part 3 of Title 24)
CEC	California Energy Code (Part 6 of Title 24)
CEC	California Energy Commission
CFC	California Fire Code
CHBC	California Historical Building Code (Part 8 of Title 24)
CMC	California Mechanical Code (Part 4 of Title 24)
CPC	California Plumbing Code (Part 5 of Title 24)
CRC	California Residential Code (Part 2.5 of Title 24)
CRSC	California Referenced Standards Code (Part 12 of Title 24)
DPH	Identifies code provisions by the Department of Public Health
DWR	Identifies code provisions by the Department of Water Resources
DSA	Division of the State Architect, a division within the Department of General Services
DSA-SS	Identifies code provisions by the Division of the State Architect-Structural Safety
DSA-SS/CC	Identifies provisions by the Division of the State Architect-Structural Safety, applicable to Community Colleges as specified
DSA-AC	Identifies code provisions by the Division of the State Architect-Access Compliance
DOE	Department of Education
DOT	Department of Transportation
HCD	Housing and Community Development
HCD 1	Identifies code provisions by HCD
HCD 2	Identifies code provisions by HCD
HCD 1AC	Identifies Housing Accessibility code provisions by HCD
IBC	International Building Code®
IFC	International Fire Code®
IEBC	International Existing Building Code®
IRC	International Residential Code®
NEC	National Electrical Code®
NFPA	National Fire Protection Association
OHP	Office of Historical Preservation
OSHPD	Office of Statewide Health Planning and
Development
OSHPD 1 and 1R	Identifies code provisions by OSHPD
OSHPD 2	Identifies code provisions by OSHPD
OSHPD 3	Identifies code provisions by OSHPD
OSHPD 4	Identifies code provisions by OSHPD
OSHPD 5	Identifies code provisions by OSHPD
SFM	Identifies code provisions by the Office of the
State Fire Marshal
SHBSB	Identifies code provisions by the State Historical Building Safety Board
SL	Identifies code provisions by the State Librarian
SLC	Identifies code provisions by the State Lands Commission
UBC™	Uniform Building Code; the UBC is no longer published or adopted in the current edition of Title 24
UBC STDS	Uniform Building Code Standards; the UBC STDS is no longer published, but relevant standards are referenced in the CEBC
UFC	Uniform Fire Code; the UFC is no longer published or adopted in the current edition of Title 24
UHC	Uniform Housing Code; adopted by HCD in Chapter 1 of Title 25
UMC	Uniform Mechanical Code®
UPC	Uniform Plumbing Code®Authority: Government Code Section 11000, and Health and Safety Code Sections 18931 (f) and 18940.5.

Reference: Government Code Section 11000, and Health and Safety Code Sections 18931 (d) and 18940.5.

1-103. Definitions.

The following definitions shall apply to this Chapter 1, of Part 1, of Title 24, California Code of Regulations. Definitions may also be provided in each of the other 12 parts of Title 24. If a definition in this section conflicts with a definition within another part of Title 24, the definition reference in the other part shall prevail within that part.

ADOPTING AGENCY (or state adopting agency). An agency of state government with authority in law to develop and adopt building standards for approval and publication in Title 24, California Code of Regulations, by the Commission. An adopting agency has authority to conduct public hearings aside from the public hearings conducted by the Commission. See Proposing Agency.

APPEAL. An appeal to the Commission, as provided and limited by Health and Safety Code Sections 18945 through 18949, by any person adversely affected by the application of an existing building standard or administrative regulation in Title 24, by a state agency or local agency.

BUILDING STANDARDS ADMINISTRATION SPECIAL REVOLVING FUND (the Fund). The Fund established in the State Treasury to receive funds submitted by the Commission pursuant to the provisions of Health and Safety Code Section 18931.6 and Article 5.

CALGreen. The California Green Building Standards in Part 11 of Title 24, California Code of Regulations.

CODE ADVISORY COMMITTEE. An advisory panel or body appointed to advise the Commission with respect to building standards as authorized by Health and Safety Code Section 18927.

CODE CHANGE (proposed provision). A proposed addition, amendment, repeal or adoption of a building standard as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 18909, or of an administrative regulation of Title 24.

CODE CHANGE SUBMITTAL (rulemaking file). The rulemaking file submitted by a state proposing agency, which includes the proposed code change(s) or provision(s) for Title 24, along with justification and all other required documents, submitted to the Commission by a proposing agency.

COMMISSION. The California Building Standards Commission established under Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.5, commencing with Section 18901.

DEPARTMENT. The Department of Housing and Community Development.

ENFORCING AGENCY (or Enforcement Agency). An agency, board, commission, department, division, office or individual assigned by law or ordinance as being responsible for the enforcement of building standards.

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR. The Chief Executive appointed by the California Building Standards Commission pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18925, to carry out the duties assigned by the California Building Standards Commission as designated in Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.5, commencing with Section 18901.

FEES, FRACTIONS THEREOF. Fee increments for individual building permit values less than $100,000 as described in Article 5, Section 1-505 and Table 1-505.

JUSTIFICATION. An initial statement of reasons and the information needed to complete a notice of proposed action, including a determination as to the effect of the code change on housing costs.

NOTICE OF PROPOSED ACTION. For the purposes of this chapter is synonymous with the term Notice of Proposed Building Standard.

OFFICE. The Office of the State Fire Marshal.

PETITION. A written submittal to the Commission or a state adopting or proposing agency by any local government agency, firm or member of the public for the purpose of proposing a new building standard or administrative regulation in Title 24, or the amendment or repeal of an existing building standard or administrative regulation in Title 24 that is currently effective.

PROPOSING AGENCY (or state proposing agency). A state agency having authority and responsibility to propose a building standard for adoption by the Commission and publication in Title 24, California Code of Regulations. A proposing agency does not have authority to conduct public hearings for the adoption of building standards. See Adopting Agency.

PUBLIC UTILITY. The California Public Utilities Commission (PUC); or which would otherwise by regulated by the PUC but are exempted by municipal charter.

SPECIAL CODE ADVISORY COMMITTEE. An ad hoc committee established by the Commission, when necessary, to advise the Commission on a subject in the code needing extensive revision or on a complex subject which needs to be regulated or to perform a review of a proposed code change that warrants special technical review.

STATE AGENCY REPRESENTATIVE(S). For the purposes of this chapter means representative(s) of state proposing or adopting agencies.

TECHNICAL REVIEW. A review of a proposed code change and its justification conducted pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18930 (c), (d), (e), (f) to ensure that a code change is justified in terms of nine-point criteria of Health and Safety Code Section 18930 (a).

TITLE 24. The 24th title within the California Code of Regulations, also referred to as the California Building Standards Code. Title 24 is reserved for building standards and administrative regulations to implement building standards approved and published, or caused to be published, by the California Building Standards Commission.

Authority: Government Code 11000, and Health and Safety Code Sections 18929.1, 18931(f) and 18949.6.

Reference: Government Code 11000, and Health and Safety Code Sections 18927, 18929–18932, 18934, 18935, 18936, 18949.1, 18949.2, 18949.3, 18949.5 and 18949.6.

1-105. Use of Commission indicia.

(a)Other than the Commission, no person, firm, agency or organization shall copy, duplicate, reprint or otherwise use the indicia of the Commission without the express written approval of the Commission. For the purposes of this section, the Commission’s indicia shall include but not be limited to any logo, symbol or emblem used by the Commission to identify codes, standards, bulletins and other documents or properties as being issued, adopted, approved, published or maintained by the Commission.

(b)Requests for approval to copy, duplicate, reprint or otherwise use the indicia of the Commission shall be in writing and be submitted to the Executive Director, California Building Standards Commission, 2525 Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento, California 95833. The address should be confirmed at the Commission’s website: www.dgs.ca.gov/ bsc. Requests shall include the identification of the intended document or material that is to include the indicium or indicia of the Commission, and the time frame for the proposed usage.

(c)The Executive Director, or designee, shall provide a written response to requests received pursuant to subsection (b). Approvals of indicia usage may include limitations to a specific usage, type of document or material, and/or time frame. Denial of indicia usage shall include the reasoning for the denial. The Commission shall consider reasonably corrected resubmittals.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Section 18931(f).

Reference: Health and Safety Code Section 18931(f).

ARTICLE 2 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE BUILDING STANDARDS COMMISSION, THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND COMMISSION PERSONNEL

1-201. Duties.

(a)Commission duties. The Commission shall perform all functions relating to the adoption and publication of the California Building Standards Code in Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations prescribed by the California Building Standards Law in Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.5, commencing with Section 18901.

(b)Executive Director duties. The Executive Director shall be the primary individual responsible for implementing the will of the Commission, and shall have the authority to:

1.Recommend to the Commission policies under which the office of the Commission will operate.

2.Interpret and implement the policies of the Commission.

3.Provide the administrative direction for the day-to-day work of the Commission.

4.Manage the technical and support staff of the Commission.

5.Represent the Commission before the Legislature.

6.Review and approve or disapprove agencies’ public notices for proposed building standards per Sections 11346.4 and 11346.5 of the Government Code.

7.Ensure that state agencies comply with Health and Safety Code Section 18930 and Government Code Section 11340 et seq. (as applicable), when adopting building standards, prior to submission to the Commission.

8.Negotiate and execute contractual agreements necessary to carry out the mission of the Commission.

9.Manage the Commission’s appeal and petition process.

10.Represent the Commission to all levels of state and local government, and with the private sector.

11.Perform other duties as required by the Commission and state statute(s).

Authority: Health and Safety Code Section 18931.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18925 and 18931.

1-203. Development of green building standards.

(a)The Commission shall adopt, approve, codify, update and publish green building standards for occupancies that are not under the explicit authority of another state agency. The Commission also may review and comment on proposals and proposed standards developed by other agencies in order to reduce or eliminate ambiguities or conflicts.

(b)A list of agencies with specific authority to propose and/or adopt building standards are identified in Title 24, Part 2, the California Building Code, Chapter 1, Division 1. The Commission shall work with these agencies to coordinate the adoption of green building standards for residential and nonresidential occupancies.

(c)In developing green building standards, the Commission shall consult with the state entities it finds to be appropriate for specific standards including, but not limited to, the
following state agencies:

1.Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery

2.California Energy Commission

3.California Air Resources Board

4.California Department of Water Resources

5.California Department of Transportation

6.California Department of General Services

7.California Department of Public Health

8.Office of State Fire Marshal

(d)The Commission also shall consult with representatives from each of the following:

1.Environmental advocacy groups

2.Interested local government and code enforcement entities

3.Building construction and design industries

4.Interested public parties

(e)The Commission may consult with and seek input from the entities and representatives identified in subsections (c) and (d) either by written comment or in a meeting format and shall consider all input provided during the development of the green building standards which is relevant to specific standards. The Commission shall provide written responses to formal comments received during the public comment period for any proposed green building standards.

(f)See Section 1-404 for requirements concerning state agency participation in the development of green building standards.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18909(c), 18929, 18930.5, 18931.6 and 18931.7.

Reference(s): Health and Safety Code Sections 18930.5, 18931.6 and 18931.7.

1-209. Code advisory committees.

(a)Standing code advisory committees. The Commission shall establish the following standing code advisory committees.

1.Accessibility

2.Plumbing, Electrical, Mechanical and Energy

3.Building, Fire and Other Regulations

4.Structural Design/Lateral Forces

5.Health Facilities

6.Green Building

(b)Special code advisory committee. The Commission may establish one or more special code advisory committees when it determines that a subject in the code needs to be extensively revised or that a complex subject which needs to be regulated is not covered or that the content of a proposed code change warrants special technical review.

(c)Quorum. A majority of the members of the code advisory committee(s) shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. A majority of the members present shall constitute a quorum for determining the outcome of a vote.

(d)Members. The code advisory committees shall be limited to a maximum of nine voting members, appointed by the Commission for one triennial code adoption cycle (3 years). The Commission can extend the term beyond 3 years if deemed necessary, and members shall hold appointments at the pleasure of the Commission. The appointments shall be made from individuals knowledgeable in the building standards or general subjects assigned to the specific committee. Members shall be solicited by the Commission based on the representations listed in this section. However, when there are no volunteers for a specific representation following a 30-day advertisement of an available committee position, the Commission may make other appointments as deemed necessary to maintain the expertise and balance of a committee:

1.Accessibility. The Commission shall solicit nominations from:

A. Ex-Officio Member(s)

(1) State Agency Representative(s)

B. Voting Member(s)

(1) Disability Access Advocate Knowledgeable in Visually Impaired

(2) Disability Access Advocate Knowledgeable in Hearing Impaired

(3) Disability Access Advocate Knowledgeable in Mobility Impaired

(4) Disability Access Advocate Knowledgeable in Environmental Health Network or Other Cognitively Impaired

(5) Local Government Building Official1

(6) Construction Industry

(7) Architect

(8) Fire Official1

(9) Public Member

2.Plumbing, electrical, mechanical and energy. The Commission shall solicit nominations from:

A. Ex-Officio Member(s)

(1) State Agency Representative(s)

B. Voting Member(s)

(1) Local Government Building Official1

(2) Environmental/Energy Organization

(3) Construction Industry

(4) Architect

(5) Fire Official1

(6) Public Member or Local Government Water Efficiency Official1

(7) Plumbing Inspector

(8) Mechanical Engineer

(9) Electrical Engineer or Electrical Inspector

3.Building, fire and other. The Commission shall solicit nominations from:

A. Ex-Officio Member(s)

(1) State Agency Representative(s)

B. Voting Member(s)

(1) Local Government Building Official1

(2) Registered Fire Protection Engineer

(3) Construction Industry

(4) Architect

(5) Commercial Building Industry

(6) Fire Official1

(7) Disability Access Advocate

(8) Public Member

4.Structural design/lateral forces. The Commission shall solicit nominations from:

A. Ex-Officio Member(s)

(1) State Agency Representative

B. Voting Member(s)

(1) Three (3) Structural Engineers

(2) Architect

(3) General Contractor

(4) Local Government Building Official1

(5) Public Member

5.Health facilities. The Commission shall solicit nominations from:

A. Ex-Officio Member(s)

(1) State Agency Representative(s)

B. Voting Member(s)

(1) Acute Care Hospital Representative

(2) Skilled Nursing Facility Representative

(3) Architect

(4) General Contractor

(5) Mechanical Engineer

(6) Electrical Engineer or Electrical Inspector

(7) Fire Protection Engineer

(8) Local Government Building Official1

(9) Primary Care or Specialty Clinic Representative

6.Green building. The Commission shall solicit nominations from:

A. Ex-Officio Member(s)

(1) State Agency Representative(s)

B. Voting Member(s)

(1) Residential Construction Industry Representative

(2) Commercial Building Industry Representatives

(3) Architect

(4) Environmental Organization Representative

(5) Local Government Building Official1

(6) Public Member or Local Government Water Efficiency Official1

(7) Fire Official1

(8) Mechanical Engineer or Energy/Building Performance Specialist

(9) Electrical Engineer, Electrical Inspector or Energy/Building Performance Specialist

1. The Local Government Building Official, Local Government Water Efficiency Official and Fire Official positions may be filled by a consultant authorized to represent the local agency providing the consultant serves in the official capacity of a full-time building, water efficiency or fire official for a single city, county or city and county local government. (Footnote shall apply to each Local Government Building Official, Local Government Water Efficiency Official and Fire Official position on every committee).

Section 1-211. Application for code advisory committee appointment.

(a)Application period. When advertising a vacancy on a Code Advisory Committee, the Commission may establish an application period with a closing date and may, at its discretion, consider applications received after the closing date.

(b)Application required. Persons desiring appointment to a position on a Code Advisory Committee must submit the application to the Commission as required by this section. A separate application is required for each advertised vacancy on a Code Advisory Committee. The Commission will not maintain applications on file for future consideration.

(c)Application form. For each Code Advisory Committee vacancy, a completed Application for Code Advisory Committee Appointment, form BSC-7, shall be submitted to the office of the Executive Director, California Building Standards Commission, 2525 Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento, CA 95833. The current address may be verified at the Commission’s website (www.dgs.ca.gov/bsc). The application form is available from the Commission or may be obtained on the Commission’s website during an open Code Advisory Committee application period.

The application shall be accompanied by a resume and may be further supported by attachments including letters of support or recommendation and other materials demonstrating expertise and knowledge applicable to the Code Advisory Committee position.

(d)Application fee. There is no application fee.

(e)Selection decision. The Commission will consider applications and make selections based on qualifications applicable to the Code Advisory Committee vacancy. All decisions by the Commission regarding appointments to Code Advisory Committees are final and are not subject to appeal.

(f)Notice of appointment. The Executive Director, or their designee, shall provide written notice to applicants selected by the Commission for appointment to a Code Advisory Committee. Written notice shall also be provided to all applicants not selected for appointment to a Code Advisory Committee.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18909(c), 18929, 18930.5, 18949.6 and 18931(f).

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18927, 18929, 18930.5, 18931 (f), 18934, 18936 and 18949.6.

ARTICLE 3 APPEALS AND PETITION PROCEDURES

1-301. Appeals and petitions.

(a)The public may submit appeals and petitions to the Commission as prescribed in this Article.

(b)Appeals and petitions concerning building standards that are not in effect at the time of submission will not be accepted by the Commission. An appeal or petition submitted on a proposed, approved and/or adopted building standard of Title 24, outside of its effective date, shall be considered invalid and returned to the submitter in accordance with this article.

(c)An appeal or petition, as defined in Section 1-103 of this chapter, is not the means to support or oppose a proposed, approved and/or adopted building standard for publication in Title 24, prior to its effective date. To provide comment on a proposed building standard, see Section 1-413 in this chapter.

(d)The Commission may accept appeals relating to actions and decisions by state and local agencies to enforce building standards, but may only make recommendations for reconsideration. The Commission has no authority to overturn a decision by a state or local agency when the matter is within the jurisdiction of that state or local agency.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931, 18945 and 18946.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931, 18945 and 18946.

1-303. Scope of appeals and types of appellants.

Appeals to the Commission and the matters which can be appealed are as follows:

(a)An appeal may be submitted by any person adversely affected by the administration of building standards or administrative regulations of Title 24, or the enforcement or the lack of enforcement of Title 24, by any state agency as prescribed in Health and Safety Code Section 18945(a) and this article.

(b)An appeal may be submitted by any person adversely affected by the enforcement of Title 24 by a local enforcement agency, in the company of the local enforcement agency, as prescribed in Health and Safety Code Section 18945(b) and this article. Joint appeals must have statewide significance.

(c)An appeal may be filed by any person, including a state or local agency adversely affected by an apparent conflict, duplication or overlap of any current Title 24 provision, or any other matter of statewide significance relating to the application of Title 24.

(d)When the basis of an appeal is the action of a state agency other than the Commission, the appellant must obtain a final determination from the state agency in question relating to the issue under appeal before the Commission will hear the appeal.

Exception: An apparent conflict, duplication or overlap in other available state appeals procedures or within the regulations or code.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931, 18945 and 18946.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931, 18945 and 18946.

1-305. Time limitations for appeals.

Appeals will be accepted by the Commission only within six (6) months of when the act, interpretation, decision or practice complained of occurred.

Exception: The Commission, at its discretion, may accept and act on an appeal when more than six (6) months have passed if special circumstances are found to exist.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Section 18931.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Section 18931.

1-307. Appeal form and filing fee.

(a)An appeal shall be submitted using Appeal Form BSC-33, which is available on the Commission’s website, or by contacting the Commission’s office by telephone at (916) 263-0916, or by email (cbsc@dgs.ca.gov). The form contains instructions on providing the necessary information and the required documents, including but not limited to:

1.The specific regulation, rules, interpretation or decision of any state agency respecting the administration of any building standard being appealed.

2.The dates of any act, interpretation or decision of any state agency related to the complaint.

3.The nature of any act, interpretation or decision of any state agency related to the complaint.

4.The reasons for the appeal.

5.Documentation of the official action of the applicable state agency with respect to the agency’s final determination on the issue.

6.Identification of witnesses, experts and other representatives of the appellant.

(b)The appeal shall be filed by mail with the Executive Director, California Building Standards Commission, 2525 Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento, California 95833. The address should be confirmed at the Commission’s website (www.dgs.ca.gov/bsc).

(c)Filing Fee: Health and Safety Code Section 18949 requires the Commission to recover the cost of administrating appeals. Accordingly, a nonrefundable fee of $450.00 shall accompany the submitted appeal form. In addition, any and all costs for an administrative law judge or costs related to a hearing before the appeals subcommittee will be the responsibility of the appellants.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931 and 18945.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931, 18945 and 18949.

1-309. Receipt and processing appeals.

(a)Receipt of any appeal shall be acknowledged in writing by the Executive Director, or their designee, within 45 days of receipt, advising the appellant and any state or local agency party to the appeal, of the acceptance or rejection of the appeal, as filed, or the need for additional information to make a determination. The reply shall also set forth the planned action of the Commission in response to an accepted appeal, together with reasons for the proposed actions.

(b)If the Executive Director determines that additional information is needed in order to process the appeal and make a determination, the Executive Director may request the additional information in the written response required by subsection (a), and defer action on the appeal until the additional information is received. If the Executive Director requests additional information, the appellant shall have 30 days from the date of the Executive Director’s request to submit the information. If the requested information is not received within 30 days, the Executive Director may treat the appeal as having been abandoned or may, upon written notice to the appellant and any state or local agency as a party to the appeal, process the appeal based on the information available. Upon written request, the Executive Director may for good cause, extend the 30-day period by one additional 30-day period.

(c)Following the acceptance of an appeal, the Executive Director and Chair of the Commission’s Appeals Committee, as appointed by the Chair of the Commission, shall, acting together, designate a hearing authority by determining whether the appeal should be heard by the Appeals Committee, the full Commission, a member of the Commission designated as hearing officer, or by a hearing officer appointed by the Office of Administrative Hearings.

(d)Within 15 days of determining the hearing authority, and no less than 15 days prior to the appeal hearing date, the Executive Director, or their designee, shall provide to the appellant and any state or local agency as a party to the appeal, written notice identifying the hearing authority, procedures, and when possible the scheduled hearing date, time and location.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931 and 18945.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931, 18945 and 18946.

1-311. Appeal hearing procedures.

(a)When it is determined pursuant to subsection 1-309(c) that the appeal shall be heard by the Commission’s Appeals Committee or a member of the Commission appointed as the hearing officer, the following provisions shall apply:

1.The Executive Director shall provide written notice of the date, time and location of hearing to interested parties, as provided in subsection 1-309(d), and may invite experts or other witnesses as necessary for the hearing.

2.The Appeals Committee or the member of the Commission appointed as the hearing officer, shall not be bound by the rules of evidence or procedure applicable in the courts. Appellant, appellant’s witnesses and any other interested persons may present testimony, argument and/or documentary material concerning the matter(s) under consideration.

3.The Appeals Committee or the member of the Commission appointed as the hearing officer shall prepare their finding(s) and decision within 30 days after the appeal hearing.

4.The Executive Director shall, in writing, advise the appellant, any state or local agency as a party to the appeal, and the Commission, of the Appeals Committee or the member of the Commission appointed as the hearing officer decision within 15 days from the date of the decision.

5.When an appeal is heard by the Appeals Committee or the member of the Commission appointed as the hearing officer, either party may request a reconsideration of the decision by the Commission. The request must be submitted to the Executive Director in writing no more than 45 days after the date the original decision by the Appeals Committee or member of the Commission appointed as the hearing officer is made.

6.Reconsideration by the Commission shall be conducted in accordance with subsection 1-311(b), and based upon the record of the appeal hearing and additional information or testimony that is specifically requested by the Commission.

7.Notwithstanding the foregoing, the appeal may be withdrawn at any time by the appellant upon written notice to the Executive Director. Upon withdrawal, no further proceeding as specified above shall take place. The withdrawal of the appeal shall be accepted with or without prejudice, as determined by the Commission’s Appeals Committee or the member of the Commission appointed as the hearing officer.

(b)When it is determined pursuant to subsection 1-309(c) that an appeal shall be heard by the Commission, or pursuant to subsection 1-311(a) 5 that a reconsideration hearing is to be conducted by the Commission, the following provisions shall apply:

1.An appeal or request for reconsideration shall be acted on by the Commission during the next regularly scheduled public Commission meeting, or within 180 days, after the date the appeal or request for reconsideration is received by the Executive Director.

2.The Executive Director shall provide written notice of the time, date and location of the hearing to interested parties, as provided in subsection 1-309(d), and invite expert or other witnesses as necessary for the hearing.

3.The Commission shall not be bound by the rules of evidence or procedure applicable in the courts. The hearing shall be conducted according to the Commission’s own rules, accepting evidence as it requires, and chaired by its regular Chairperson. Appellant and other interested parties may present relevant testimony, argument or documentary material as acceptable to the Commission.

4.The Commission shall make a decision on the appeal at an open meeting thereof, provided that the matter may be continued or taken under advisement for decision at a later meeting of the Commission, or re-referred to the Appeals Committee for further consideration and report to the Commission. No Commissioner may cast a vote on the determination of an appeal unless the Commissioner was present at the hearing held for appeal.

5.Notwithstanding the foregoing, the appeal may be withdrawn at any time by the appellant upon written notice to the Executive Director. Upon withdrawal, no further proceedings as specified above shall take place. The withdrawal of the appeal shall be accepted with or without prejudice, as determined by the Commission.

6.The Executive Director shall, in writing, advise the appellant, and any state or local agency as a party to the appeal, of the decision of the Commission within 15 days from the date of the official Commission decision.

(c)The Commission may elect, pursuant to subsection 1-309(c), to refer the appealing parties to a hearing officer appointed by the Office of Administrative Hearings. When such referral is made to the Office of Administrative Hearings, the hearing procedures and requirements shall be conducted as prescribed in Health and Safety Code Section 18946 and to the applicable regulations in California Code of Regulations, Title 1, Division 2.

(d)Action by the Commission on the appeal of a building standards issue within the authority of the Commission shall exhaust the administrative relief of the appellant.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931, 18945 and 18946.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931, 18945 and 18946 and Government Code Section 13959.

1-313. Petitions.

(a)Any local governmental agency, firm or member of the public may petition either the Commission or the authoritative agency for the proposal, adoption, amendment or repeal of any building standard or administrative regulation in Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.

(b)Petitions shall be submitted to the Commission using Petition Form BSC-30, available on the Commission’s website (www.dgs.ca.gov/bsc). The form contains instructions as to the information to be provided and documents to accompany the petition form.

(c)Petitions shall be filed by mail with the Executive Director at: CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS COMMISSION, 2525 Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento, California 95833. The address should be confirmed at the Commission’s website (www.dgs.ca.gov/bsc).

(d)The Commission may refer received petitions to the state agency, or multiple agencies, having specific jurisdiction for the subject of the adopted building standard or for the subject of the proposed building standard as proposed by the petitioner. Except as provided in Section 1-329 of this chapter, a state agency receiving a petition referred by the Commission shall process the petition as required by this article, including the reporting of actions and decisions by the agency to the Commission.

(e)Petitions are not to be used to address matters relating to a currently proposed building standard or an adopted building standard prior to its effective date. Any concerns relating to currently proposed building standards should be brought forward during the public comment period designated for the proposed building standard.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931 and 18949.6.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931 and 18949.6.

1-315. Criteria for petition.

A petition for the adoption, amendment or repeal of a state building standard must meet the following criteria:

(a)The subject issue must have statewide significance and must have implications for a whole category of projects or a broad range of project types, and:

(b)The rationale for the petition must take the form of at least one of the following criteria:

1.A current building standard conflicts with pertinent statute(s) and/or regulation(s). To substantiate this criterion, the petitioner must cite the subject building standard and the conflicting statute(s) and/or regulation(s), and provide a clear written description of why the two are inconsistent.

2.Compliance with a current building standard is routinely impossible or onerous. To substantiate this criterion, the petitioner must cite the current building standard, present written or photographic evidence of the difficulty in complying with it, and clearly show that the problem is common or potentially common to many different projects or project types in many different circumstances. This criterion shall not be used to justify a petition for the repeal or amendment of a current building standard that poses difficulty to a single project.

3.A current building standard is inefficient or ineffective. To substantiate this criterion, the petitioner must cite the subject building standard, provide clear and concise written or photographic evidence of its ineffectiveness or inefficiency, describe a proposed alternative and provide clear and convincing written or photographic evidence that it is more efficient or effective.

4.A current building standard is obsolete. To substantiate this criterion, the petitioner must show at least one of the following facts:

A. A material or product specified in the building standard is not available, or

B. There is no statute authorizing the subject building standard, or

C. Significant developments in procedures, materials or other issues subject to the building standard have created a need for amendment or deletion of the building standard; that current state statutes permit amendment or deletion of the building standards; and that the building standard has the effect of prohibiting the use of a material or procedure that has demonstrated satisfactory performance and meets the intended purpose of building standards.

5.There is a need for a new building standard. To substantiate this criterion, the petitioner must provide a clear written description of the proposed building standard, explain why it is necessary and cite the statute(s) that require or authorize the new building standard.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931 and 18949.6.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931 and 18949.6.

1-317. Emergency petition.

(a)A petitioner may assert the petition requires immediate action because there is potential imminent danger to public health, safety or welfare. To substantiate the existence of potential imminent danger, the petitioner must include in the petition a written description of the specific facts showing the need for immediate action.

(b)If the emergency petition is approved by the Commission and if the petition is accepted pursuant to this article, the proposing agency or adopting agency shall develop and/or adopt new or amended building standards necessary to satisfy the cause for the petition. The new or amended building standards shall be proposed and adopted as emergency building standards as permitted by Health and Safety Code Sections 18934.8 and 18937, and as provided for in section 1-419 of this chapter.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931, 18934.8, 18937 and 18949.6.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931, 18934.8, 18937 and 18949.6.

1-319. Petition processing by the Commission.

(a)Within 45 days after the date of receiving a petition, the Commission shall determine whether the petition meets the requirements of this article for petitions and provide the petitioner written notification on the Commission’s determination and/or related action(s).

(b)If the Commission determines that the petition does not meet the requirements of this article for petitions, the petition shall be returned to the petitioner without action but with written notification including itemization of the missing or incomplete items. he Commission shall retain a copy of the petition being returned to the petitioner in accordance with subparagraph (f).

(c)If the Commission determines that the petition meets the requirements of this article for petitions and the subject matter of the petition is within the Commission’s jurisdiction provided in statute, the Commission shall provide the petitioner written notification of the acceptance of the petition and planned action. The Commission shall act on the accepted petition during the next regularly scheduled code adoption cycle.

(d)If the Commission determines the subject matter of a petition is within the specific jurisdiction of another proposing or adopting agency, the Commission shall forward the complete petition to that agency for its review and determination. The forwarded petition shall be accompanied by a copy of the Commission’s written notification to the petitioner, which shall indicate the petition has been forwarded to the identified proposing or adopting agency having jurisdiction for its review and determination.

(e)Upon receipt of a petition forwarded by the Commission, the proposing or adopting agency shall act in accordance with Section 1-321. If a proposing or adopting agency disagrees with the Commission’s determination in forwarding a petition to its agency, and thus sends the forwarded petition back to the Commission, the Commission shall return the petition to the petitioner, without action, within 30 days of receipt of the petition returned by the proposing or adopting agency, in accordance with the procedures provided in this section.

(f)The Commission shall maintain records relating to the submittal, status and correspondence of petitions received by the Commission.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931 and 18949.6.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931 and 18949.6.

1-321. Petition processing by proposing or adopting agencies.

Upon receipt of a petition forwarded by the Commission, or a petition received directly from a petitioner, the proposing or adopting agency shall be responsible for the following duties:

(a)If the proposing or adopting agency receives a forwarded petition from the Commission but disagrees with the Commission’s determination that a petition is complete, or if the proposing or adopting agency believes the petition is in the jurisdiction of a different agency, the proposing or adopting agency shall notify the Commission in writing within 45 days after the date of receiving the petition. In notifying the Commission, the agency shall include an itemization of the missing or incomplete items and/or reasons why the petition is not within the proposing or adopting agency’s authority as provided in statute.

(b)If the proposing or adopting agency determines that a received petition, which has not been forwarded by the Commission, does not meet the requirements of this article for petitions, the agency shall, within 45 days after the date of receiving the petition, provide the petitioner written notification of the determination with itemization of the missing or incomplete items. The agency shall provide the Commission a copy of the notification at the time the notification is sent to the petitioner.

(c)If the proposing or adopting agency determines that it has jurisdiction and that a received petition is complete, it shall take the following action(s) as appropriate, communicating with the petitioner and Commission, within the noted time lines:

1.The agency may deny or accept a petition in part and may grant other relief or take other action as it may determine to be warranted by the petition and shall notify the petitioner and Commission in writing of the action.

2.If the agency denies the petition for cause pursuant to Section 1-323 of this article [Criteria for denying a petition], it shall do so in writing within 45 days after the date of receiving the petition from the petitioner, or the referral by the Commission.

3.If the agency accepts the petition, it shall notify the petitioner and Commission in writing within 45 days after the date of receiving the petition. For the purposes of this section, accepting the petition indicates that the agency believes the issue(s) merit(s) proceeding to the development of a code change submittal as prescribed in this chapter.

4.If the accepted petition contains an emergency clause, the agency shall also rule on the existence of an emergency. If the agency concurs that an emergency exists, it shall schedule code development and begin adoption procedures on an emergency basis in accordance with section 1-419 of this chapter. The agency shall notify the Executive Director of its intent to commence rulemaking pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18926(b).

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931, 18949.1, 18949.2, 18949.3, 18949.5 and 8949.6.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18926, 18931 and 18949.6.

1-323. Criteria for denying a petition.

The Commission, or other proposing or adopting agency, whichever is processing a petition, may deny a petition for cause using at least one of the following criteria:

(a)The subject building standard is already scheduled for review at the next regular triennial or other scheduled adoption. To substantiate this criterion, the Commission or other agency shall include in its written denial a schedule for the planned review. Alternatively, the Commission or other agency may approve a petition but defer its implementation until the next scheduled adoption.

(b)The issues cited by the petitioner are factually incorrect. To substantiate this criterion, the Commission or other agency shall identify in its written denial the incorrect facts.

(c)The issues cited by the petitioner are not within the state’s jurisdiction. To substantiate this criterion, the Commission or agency shall show in its written denial why the issues are outside its jurisdiction.

(d)The issues cited by the petitioner have been raised and answered through another petition or during the previous rulemaking. To substantiate this criterion, the Commission or agency shall include with its written denial a copy of the previous petition and its response or the pertinent rulemaking file information.

Note: If new facts or substantiating data, pertinent to a petition, are provided, this criterion shall not be grounds for denying a petition.

(e)Resolving the issues raised by the petitioner would compromise the agency’s ability to carry out its legal mandate. To substantiate this criterion, the Commission or agency shall include with its denial the specific ways in which its legal mandate would be compromised.

(f)The building standard proposed by the petitioner would do any of the following:

1.Create unnecessary hardship or expense

2.Inappropriately exclude materials, equipment or brands

3.Include only specific brands

4.Conflict with federal or state laws or regulations or existing building standards

5.Be otherwise without merit and public benefit

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931 and 18949.6.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931 and 18949.6.

1-325. Reconsideration of denied petition.

(a)A petitioner may request reconsideration of any part or all of a decision of any proposing or adopting agency or the Commission on any denied petition.

(b)The request shall be submitted in accordance with the following:

1.Petition procedures of this article.

2.Include the reason(s) why the decision to deny the petition should be reconsidered.

3.Is submitted to and received by the agency having authority that denied the petition no later than the close of business on the 60th day after the date of the decision involved.

(c)The agency’s or Commission’s reconsideration of any matter relating to a petition shall be subject to the provisions of this article.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931, 18945, and 18949.6.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931, 18945, and 18949.6.

1-327. Reconsideration by the Commission.

(a)The Commission shall have no authority to reevaluate or reverse the decisions on petitions made by a proposing agency or adopting agency when the subject of the petition is within the specific jurisdiction of the proposing agency or adopting agency.

(b)Requests for the reconsideration of a decision by the Commission shall meet the requirements of Section 1-325 of this article.

(c)Should the Commission reverse its previous decision made on a petition, the petition shall be considered accepted and a rulemaking process shall begin as provided in this chapter.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931, 18945, and 18949.6.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931, 18945, and 18949.6.

1-329. Substitution of or supplementation by agency procedures.

(a)The provisions of this article pertaining to petitions shall not apply when an agency notifies the Commission that a petition process is mandated by specific statutes in addition to Government Code Sections 11340.6 and 11340.7, and/or that it has adopted its own regulations or procedures complying with Government Code Sections 11340.6 and 11340.7, and that it has notified the public of the existence of these statutes, regulations or procedures. Notification to the Commission shall consist of a written copy of the statutes, regulations or procedures and a description of the methods used to make the public aware of their existence. Upon receiving notification, the Commission shall exclude the agency from compliance with this article pertaining to petitions. If the Commission receives a petition pertaining to an excluded agency’s jurisdiction, the Commission shall forward the petition without undertaking any of the duties prescribed by this article pertaining to petitions directly to the agency and shall notify the petitioner of that fact.

(b)These regulations are not intended to be the sole means by which the proposing agency or adopting agencies and the interested public can raise, discuss and resolve issues pertaining to building standards. Agency procedures such as public participation meetings, advisory committees, written and verbal correspondence between members of the public and agency personnel, and other methods are considered alternatives that may be chosen by a member of the public instead of or in addition to the petition procedures described in this article.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931 and 18949.6.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931 and 18949.6.

ARTICLE 4 RULEMAKING FOR THEADOPTION OF BUILDING STANDARDS

1-401. Purpose.

This article establishes basic minimum procedural requirements for a code adoption cycle for proposing agencies to ensure adequate public participation in the development of building standards, to ensure adequate technical review and adequate time for technical review by code advisory committees and to ensure adequate notice to the public of compiled code change submittals prior to adoption by the Commission.

1-403. Public participation.

(a)Precycle public participation. Every state agency with authority to propose or adopt building standards shall develop proposed building standards in a manner to ensure public participation. Methods for ensuring public participation may include but are not limited to the following:

1.Identify and maintain a listing of all interested groups or persons affected by building standards of the type within the jurisdiction of the agency.

2.Prior to commencing the development of proposed building standards, notify all interested groups and persons that building standards are to be developed, and solicit suggestions and a means for participation.

3.Conduct workshops to solicit input where the proposals are complex or large in number and cannot easily be reviewed during the comment period.

4.Make available draft proposals to interested groups or persons expressing interest.

5.Establish a procedure to provide interested groups or persons the opportunity to advise the agency of the impact of the proposed standards.

(b)Written public comments. The public may submit written comments in support or opposition to proposed building standards or proposed repeal of existing building standards. The written comment may be provided at a public meeting of a code advisory committee, and at any public meeting or hearing by the Commission conducted for the purpose of considering building standards published or proposed to be published in Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, and during any public comment period announced by an issued Notice of Proposed Action or agenda. See Section 1-413 for additional information.

(c)Oral public comments. The public may provide oral comment in support or opposition to proposed building standards and the proposed repeal of existing building standards during a public meeting of a code advisory committee, or during any public meeting or hearing of the Commission conducted for the purpose of considering building standards published or proposed to be published in Title 24, California Code of Regulations.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18929.1 and 18934.

Reference: Government Code Section 11346.45, Health and Safety Code Sections 18929.1 and 18934.

1-404. State agency participation for green building standards.

The Commission and other state agencies that propose green building standards shall allow for input by other state agencies that have expertise in green building subject areas but do not have the statutory authority to propose green building standards. The process for making recommended changes to proposing state agencies shall align with an 18-month code adoption cycle (triennial or intervening) and the proposing state agency’s rulemaking schedule as follows:

(a)Timing for submittal. The timing for receipt of recommended changes shall be determined by the state agency that has statutory authority to propose green building standards for a specific occupancy. Pursuant to 1-403(a)(2), prior to commencing the development of proposed building standards, proposing state agencies shall notify all interested parties that building standards are to be developed, and solicit suggestions and a means for participation.

(b)Mandatory or voluntary standards. The state agency recommending changes shall specify whether the recommended changes are intended to be mandatory or voluntary green building standards, and shall indicate, to the extent possible, if a recommended voluntary green building measure should be considered for possible adoption as a mandatory measure within the two subsequent adoption cycles. The proposing state agency shall determine if a recommended green building standard will be proposed as a mandatory or voluntary measure.

(c)Submittal documents. Submittal documents shall be submitted as a complete package and shall include, but are not limited to, all of the following:

1.Recommended regulatory text for new green building standards or revisions to existing green building standards, in strikeout/underline format;

2.Rationale that clearly explains the specific purpose and the need for the changes including the basis for recommending that the items be considered for adoption as mandatory or voluntary green building standards;

3.Fiscal and economic analysis and supporting documentation in a format specified by the proposing state agency, which shall include the cost of compliance;

4.Verifiable and appropriate technical analysis, data or other information in support of the recommended changes including information on product availability. Data or information shall include, but is not limited to, copies of reports, findings, data relied upon or other materials and analyses;

5.Certification by the state agency suggesting the recommended changes that the content of the aforementioned submittal documents are true and accurate; and

6.Any additional information as requested by the proposing state agency.

(d)Availability to the public. The proposing state agency, in complying with the provisions of Section 1-403 and having determined to propose the recommended changes as building standards, shall make the proposals available to interested groups, persons expressing interest, and the public pursuant to Government Code §§11346.45 and 11347.1.

(e)State agency declines to proceed. The proposing state agency may decline to proceed with recommended changes from the suggesting state agency with expertise in green building subject areas due to any of, including but not limited to, the following circumstances:

1.Recommended changes conflict with the proposing state agency’s mission, stated goals and/or other mission critical program requirements;

2.The suggesting state agency has failed to provide the submittal documents as required;

3.The suggesting state agency provides data, analysis or information that is flawed or otherwise determined by the proposing state agency to be unusable in-whole or in-part;

4.The suggesting state agency fails to provide a complete package of submittal documents within the timeframe directed by the proposing state agency in order to appropriately advance the suggested changes during the subject rulemaking cycle; and

5.Any other reason as determined by the proposing state agency.

(f)Rulemaking participation. When the proposing state agency determines that it will accept and advance a recommended change submitted by a state agency with expertise in green building subject areas during a rulemaking code adoption cycle, the state agency that submitted the recommended change shall be notified in writing of the acceptance within 30 days of receipt of the submittal documents.

The written notification of receipt of submittal documents shall identify any assistance the proposing state agency may require from the suggesting state agency during the rulemaking process. This may include, but is not limited to contributions and participation in pre-cycle workshops or focus group meetings, development of proposed express terms and statement of reasons, providing research or documentation needed to support the suggested changes and comply with the requirements of the initial statement of reasons, and the State of California Department of Finance Economic and Fiscal Impact Statement (Std. 399), code advisory committee presentations, and/or presenting the proposed code change before the Commission. The proposing state agency may request other documentation as necessary to comply with the rulemaking process.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18929.1, 18930.5 and 18934.

Reference: Government Code Section 11346.45, Health and Safety Code Sections 18929.1, 18930.5 and 18934.

1-405. State adopting agency hearing date.

State adopting agencies planning to conduct hearings relative to building standards shall, prior to giving public notice, acquire the written approval of the Commission as to the date, time and place of the hearing(s). The approval may be in the form of the Commission’s approval of the proposed Notice of Proposed Action submitted by an adopting agency, when the date, time and place for the hearing is included in the proposed Notice of Proposed Action.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931 and 18935.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931 and 18935.

1-406. Commencement of rulemaking.

(a)In order to effectively administer the Triennial and Intervening Code Adoption Cycles, the Commission shall establish deadlines for state adopting agency and state proposing agency submittals of rulemaking files of adopted or proposed building standards for publication in Title 24, California Code of Regulations.

(b)The Commission shall notify state adopting agencies and state proposing agencies in writing of the deadlines for acceptance of rulemaking files a minimum of 180 days prior to the deadline. State adopting agencies and state proposing agencies shall submit rulemaking files as specified in this article to the Commission on or before the deadline for acceptance specified in the written notice.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18929.1 and 18930.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18930, 18931 and 18933.

1-407. Initial rulemaking file submittals by a state proposing agency.

(a)State proposing agencies developing building standards, or administrative regulations to support building standards, to be published in Title 24, shall prepare a rulemaking file for submittal to the office of the Commission, which shall comply with Article 5 (commencing with Section 11346) of Chapter 3.5 of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code. The Notice of Proposed Action required by this section shall be approved by the Commission prior to any official notice to conduct a hearing or comment period regarding the proposed rulemaking.

Note: Current forms, templates, and checklists for developing rulemakings are available from the Commission to assist state proposing and adopting agencies. These are provided in order to help ensure that the state agencies’ rulemaking documents comply with specific requirements for content, completeness, statutory authority and reference and numerous other requirements.

(b)File content. The initial rulemaking file submitted to the Commission shall include the following:

1.One (1) original Building Standards Face Sheet (BSC-1), with the wet signature of the agency director or designee.

2.One (1) copy of the Notice of Proposed Action. The Notice of Proposed Action shall be complete except for the public comment period portion. The public comment period will be determined by the Commission staff.

3.Two (2) copies of the Initial Express Terms showing the proposed building standards or amendments to existing building standards in strikeout/underline format. The language, including numbering and punctuation, of proposed new building standards or amendments to existing building standards shall be shown underlined. Proposed deletions of existing building standards shall be shown in strikeout type. Existing building standards to remain without amendment shall be shown without underlining or strikeout or other highlighting.

4.Two (2) copies of the Initial Statement of Reasons for proposing the adoption, amendment, or repeal of a regulation.

5.One (1) copy of the Department of Finance Economic and Fiscal Impact Statement (STD. 399). Wet signatures are not required on STD. 399 until final submittal of the rulemaking file.

6.Two (2) copies of the written Nine-Point Criteria Analysis substantiating compliance with Health and Safety Code Section 18930.

7.One (1) electronic file copy of each of the above documents listed under subsection 1-407(b), which shall be suitable for immediate placement on the Commission’s website (www.dgs.ca.gov/bsc) for public viewing. Items 2, 3, 4 and 6 listed under this section shall be in compliance with the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0, or a subsequent version, published by the Web Accessibility Initiative of the World Wide Web Consortium at a minimum Level AA success criteria. [See Government Code Section 11546.7(a).]

(c)Upon approval of the Notice of Proposed Action for building standards, the Executive Director will forward the approved Notice of Proposed Action to the Office of Administrative Law for the sole purpose of publication in the California Regulatory Notice Register before the start of the public comment period, and return an approved copy to the proposing agency. If a Notice of Proposed Action is found to be incomplete or incorrect by Commission staff, the Executive Director shall return it to the proposing agency within 10 days with a written listing of the found deficiencies to enable the agency to make corrections for resubmittal to the Commission.

1.Any Notice of Proposed Action not acted upon within 20 days by the Commission staff shall be considered approved and may be published in the California Regulatory Notice Register.

Authority: Government Code Sections 11346−11348 and Health and Safety Code Sections 18930, 18931, 18935 and 18949.6.

Reference: Government Code Section 11546.7(a) and Health and Safety Code Sections 18930, 18931, 18935 and 18949.6.

1-408. Certification of delegation of authority.

(a)Whenever a certification is required by this article, it shall be made by the head of the state agency that is proposing, adopting, amending or repealing building standards or administrative regulations, or by a designee of the agency head. The certification and delegation shall be in writing.

(b)The certification wet signature required on the Notice/ Submission Face Sheet (BSC-1) by Sections 1-407(b)1, 1-415(a)1, and 1-419(b)1 and the certification wet signature required on the Department of Finance Economic and Fiscal Impact Statement (STD. 399) required by Section 1-415(a)7 shall be made by the agency director, or their designee, of the agency proposing or adopting the building standards. A written delegation identifying the agency’s authorized signatory designee(s) shall be submitted prior to or with the rulemaking file(s) when the Notice/Submission Face Sheet (BSC-1) is signed by other than the agency director.

Authority: Government Code Sections 11340 et seq., and Health and Safety Code Sections 18929.1, 18930, 18931, 18934, 18935 and 18949.6.

Reference: Government Code Sections 11340 et seq., and Health and Safety Code Sections 18929.1, 18930, 18931, 18934, 18935 and 18949.6.

1-409. Code advisory committee review.

(a)Prior to conducting any hearing or public comment period as part of the rulemaking proceeding required by the Administrative Procedure Act, the Commission shall assign an initial rulemaking file, received on or before the deadline established under Section 1-406 of this article, to one or more code advisory committees specifically knowledgeable in the building standard being proposed and schedule the submittal for a noticed public hearing to ensure adequate opportunity for public participation and technical review.

(b)A state proposing agency responsible for developing an initial rulemaking file shall attend the code advisory committee meeting to present its proposal, and be prepared to respond to committee comments and questions.

(c)Code advisory committee reviews. A code advisory committee shall conduct a public hearing to perform a technical review of all initial rulemaking files assigned to it by the Commission. A code advisory committee meeting shall be scheduled by the Commission and shall be open to the public.

(d)Code advisory committee meeting notice. The location, date and time of a code advisory committee meeting shall be noticed by the Commission and conducted in accordance with the Bagley-Keene Open Meeting Act (Gov. Code, §§ 11120–11132.).

(e)Code advisory committee recommendations. A code advisory committee shall make a recommendation on each proposed provision within the initial rulemaking file. A recommendation other than “approve” shall include a substantiating reason based on the Nine-Point Criteria in Health and Safety Code Section 18930. The recommendations to the Commission shall be based on one of the following and shall become part of the rulemaking file:

1.Approve. Approval of a proposed provision as submitted.

2.Disapprove. A proposed provision does not meet one or more specified criteria of Health and Safety Code Section 18930.

3.Further study required. A proposed provision has merit but does not meet one or more specified criteria of Health and Safety Code Section 18930. The proposed provision requires further study by the proposing agency. Upon further study, the proposing agency may resubmit the proposed provision for a comment period in the current cycle. The committee may recommend that the proposing agency submit the proposed provision in the next code adoption cycle after further study, or, if the matter can be resolved in time, submit the proposed provision for a comment period in the current cycle.

4.Approve as amended. Approval as amended of a proposed provision, as suggested by the committee for organization, cross-referencing, clarity and editorial improvements or as amended and submitted for committee review by the agency. Modifications are justified in terms of Health and Safety Code Section 18930.

(f)Code advisory committee reports. The code advisory committee report of recommendations to the Commission shall be made available to the public for review and comment and be included in the Commission’s rulemaking file.

(g)State proposing agency action. State proposing agencies shall address each code advisory committee recommendation in the revised Initial Statement of Reasons by explaining what, if any, action was taken or not taken to address the recommendation.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931 and 18935.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931 and 18935.

1-411. Public comment rulemaking file submitted by a state proposing agency.

(a)Public comment periods, including 45-day and 15-day periods, shall be conducted according to Article 5 (commencing with Section 11346) of Chapter 3.5 of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code.

(b)State proposing agencies shall submit rulemaking files to the Commission on or before the deadline established by the Commission, in preparation for the 45-day public comment period.

Note: Current forms, templates, and checklists for developing rulemakings are available from the Commission to assist state proposing and adopting agencies. These are provided in order to help ensure that the state agencies’ rulemaking documents comply with specific requirements for content, completeness, statutory authority and reference and numerous other requirements.

(c)File content. The rulemaking file shall include the following items.

1.One (1) copy of the Notice of Proposed Action.

2.Two (2) copies of the 45-Day Express Terms, including any amendments made to address code advisory committee recommendations.

3.Two (2) copies of the Initial Statement of Reasons, including explanations of any revisions suggested in the 45-Day Express Terms to address code advisory committee recommendations.

4.All other items required by Section 1-407 that have been amended since the initial rulemaking file was submitted for Code Advisory Committee review.

5.One (1) electronic file copy of each document submitted, which shall be suitable for immediate placement on the Commission’s website (www.dgs.ca.gov/bsc) for public viewing. Items 1, 2, 3 and 4 (Nine-Point Criteria Analysis only) listed under this section shall be in compliance with the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0, or a subsequent version, published by the Web Accessibility Initiative of the World Wide Web Consortium at a minimum Level AA success criteria. [See Government Code Section 11546.7(a).]

(d)In coordination with the Commission, and with the Commission’s approval of the submitted rulemaking file items, a state proposing agency shall perform the following to carry out the public comment periods:

1.Verify the rulemaking items submitted by the state proposing agency are posted and available to the public on the Commission’s website (www.dgs.ca.gov/bsc).

2.Distribute the Notice of Proposed Action to the parties on record with the state proposing agency that have requested to receive proposed rulemaking documents.

3.Provide printed or electronic files of the rulemaking documents described in the Notice of Proposed Action, if requested.

4.Maintain all written public comments received during the public comment periods in preparation for developing the final rulemaking file for submittal to the Commission for adoption.

5.Public comments received by a state proposing agency shall be forwarded to the Commission.

(e)Coordinate with the Commission should it be necessary to conduct additional 45-day and/or 15-day public comment periods.

Authority: Government Code Section 11346 et seq. and Health and Safety Code Sections 18929.1, 18930, 18934, 18935 and 18949.6.

Reference: Government Code Sections 11346 et seq. and 11546.7(a) and Health and Safety Code Sections 18929.1, 18930, 18934, 18935 and 18949.6.

1-413. Public comments and related actions.

(a)Anyone wishing to provide written or oral comment on a recommendation of the code advisory committee(s) and/or on a proposed building standard or the repeal of an existing building standard may do so in accordance with this section. The Commission, or state proposing agency, shall consider public comments received during a public comment period announced by a Notice of Proposed Action.

(b)When no public hearing is scheduled as part of a public comment period, a public hearing may be requested. Upon written request received, no later than 15 days prior to the close of the public comment period, a public hearing pursuant to Government Code Section 11346.8 shall be held by the Commission when the Commission is the proposing agency, or state proposing agency responsible for the proposal, to receive comment on the proposed building standard or repeal of an existing building standard, its justification or code advisory committee recommendations. At the hearing statements, arguments, or comments, either oral or in writing, or both, shall be permitted.

(c)A written or oral public comment submitted pursuant to this section shall refer to a specific recommendation made by a code advisory committee on a proposed building standard or repeal of an existing building standard. The public comment shall clearly indicate the action desired and include a substantiating reason for the desired action based on the Nine-Point Criteria in Health and Safety Code Section 18930.

(d)The Commission shall make available to the public upon request a record of written and oral comments received at the Commission office, or during code advisory committee meetings and meetings and hearings by the Commission, and during public comment periods, in regard to a proposed building standard or the proposed repeal of an existing building standard.

(e)The Commission and/or state proposing agency, whichever is appropriate, shall consider the comments received during a code advisory committee meeting and during a public comment period from the public pursuant to this section. Any amendments to the proposed building standard or proposed repeal of an existing building standard as a result of the public comment and determinations shall be explained in the Final Statement of Reasons.

(f)Following all public comment periods for a proposed building standard or proposed repeal of an existing building standard, the Commission will conduct a public meeting to consider the approval or adoption of the proposal.

Note: The Commission provides a suggested public comment form at the Commission’s website - dgs.ca.gov/BSC

No new issues will be raised before the Commission that were not included in the record of comments.

Items not challenged but affected as a result of an action on another item may also be considered at the Commission meeting to eliminate conflict, duplication or overlap.

Authority: Government Code Section 11346 et seq. and Health and Safety Code Sections 18929.1, 18930, 18934 and 18935.

Reference: Government Code Section 11346 et seq. and Health and Safety Code Sections 18929.1, 18930, 18934 and 18935.

1-415. Final rulemaking file by state proposing agencies.

(a)After any hearings and the close of all public comment periods a final rulemaking file shall be submitted to the Commission with all rulemaking documents complete and ready for the Commission’s public meeting to consider adoption. Forms, templates, and checklists are available from the Commission. Each final rulemaking file shall be organized and indexed to identify the following items required for inclusion:

1.One (1) original Building Standards Face Sheet (BSC-1) with the wet signature of the agency director or designee.

2.One (1) copy of the Notice of Proposed Action.

3.One (1) copy of the Informative Digest.

4.One (1) copy of the Initial Statement of Reasons.

5.One (1) copy of the Final Express Terms to illustrate the final proposed building standards.

6.One (1) copy of the Finding of Emergency Statement (submitted only with Emergency Building Standards). Also see Section 1-419 of this article.

7.One (1) copy of the Department of Finance Economic and Fiscal Impact Statement (STD. 399) containing all required wet signatures as appropriate, together with fiscal analysis prepared by the submitting Agency.

8.One (1) copy of the written transcript or recorded minutes of any public hearings.

9.One (1) copy of each exhibit submitted or written comment received at any public hearing conducted by the agency and a transcript of any oral comments received.

10.One (1) copy of each written comment received during public comment period(s), and a memo attesting to the 45-day public availability period.

11.One (1) copy of the Final Statement of Reasons and any studies, surveys or documents used to support the rationale for the proposed building standard(s).

12.One (1) copy of the Updated Informative Digest.

13.One (1) copy of the proposed standards with any post hearing changes indicated, and a memo attesting to the 15-day public availability period (if applicable).

14.One (1) original Certification of Close and Complete of the Rulemaking File with the wet signature of the agency director or designee.

15.One (1) copy of the written Nine-Point Criteria Analysis, which shall justify the approval of the building standard(s) in terms of the criteria as set forth in the State Building Standards Law, Part 2.5, Division 13, Section 18930 et seq., of the Health and Safety Code.

16.One (1) copy of the Certification of Compliance, which is required to make emergency building standards permanent (submitted only with Emergency Building Standards during certifying rulemaking).

17.One (1) copy of a written statement confirming that the state agency complied with the provisions of Government Code Section 11346.4(a)(1) through (4) regarding the mailing of notice of proposed action at least 45 days prior to public hearing and close of the public comment period. The statement shall include the date upon which the notice was mailed. This section is not intended to require an agency to provide a copy of its mailing list to support the statement.

18.One (1) electronic file copy of each of the above documents listed under this section. The electronic files shall be suitable for immediate placement on the Commission’s website for public viewing. Items 4 through 6, 11 through 13, and 15 listed under this section shall be in compliance with the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0, or a subsequent version, published by the Web Accessibility Initiative of the World Wide Web Consortium at a minimum Level AA success criteria. [See Government Code Section 11546.7(a).]

(b)The proposed building standards shall be submitted in the strikeout/underline format. If the proposed building standards amend existing building standards, all deletions must be shown in strikeout type and all additions, including punctuation, must be underlined. The provisions of this section may be waived by the Executive Director through written notification to the adopting agency.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18931 and 18949.6.

Reference: Government Code Section 11546.7(a) and Health and Safety Code Sections 18931 and 18949.6.

1-417. Final actions by the Commission and proposing agency.

(a)Following the close of the public comment period, and any public hearing, the Commission shall take one of the following actions on each received final rulemaking file proposing to adopt new, repeal, or amend building standards.

1.Approve. The Commission approves a proposed code change as submitted. The change is justified in terms of Health and Safety Code Section 18930.

2.Disapprove. The Commission disapproves a proposed code change as not justified in terms of Health and Safety Code Section 18930.

3.Further study required. The Commission finds that a proposed code change has merit but does not meet specified criteria of Health and Safety Code Section 18930. The change requires further study and justification by the proposing agency. The proposed code change may be submitted in a future code adoption cycle with further study and justification.

4.Approve as amended. The Commission approves a proposed code change as modified by the proposing Agency Director or authorized representative in accordance with an approved written delegation order. No modification shall be made that materially alters a requirement, right, responsibility, condition or prescription in the text made available to the public for comment in accordance with this chapter. The proposing agency shall justify the modification pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18930 in an amended justification consistent with the approval action submitted to the Commission within 15 days. Failure to submit the amended justification within that time is cause for disapproval.

(b)Withdrawal. A proposing agency may withdraw a proposed code change as determined appropriate at any time during the rulemaking process.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18929.1, 18949.6 and 18931(f).

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18927, 18929 through 18932, 18934, 18935, 18936, 18949.1, 18949.2, 18949.3, 18949.5 and 18949.6.

1-419. Emergency building standards.

(a)Emergency building standards may be developed and acted on as provided in Health and Safety Code Sections 18937 through 18938 and other referenced or applicable provisions of California Building Standards Law (HS. Code, § 18901 et seq.) and the Administrative Procedure Act (Gov. Code, § 11340 et seq.). Emergency building standards shall be acted on within 30 days and shall not be effective until approved by the Commission and filed with the Secretary of State.

(b)Rulemaking files for emergency building standards submitted to the Commission for consideration shall include each of the following:

1.One (1) original Building Standards Face Sheet (BSC-1), with the wet signature of the agency director or designee.

2.Two (2) copies of the Finding of Emergency satisfying requirements of Government Code Section 11346.1.

3.Two (2) copies of the Express Terms illustrating the proposed emergency building standards.

4.Two (2) copies of the written Nine-Point Criteria Analysis substantiating compliance with Health and Safety Code Section 18930.

5.Any supporting documentation on which the proposed emergency building standards are based.

6.One (1) electronic file copy of each of the above documents listed under subsection 1-419(b). The electronic documents shall be suitable for immediate placement on the Commission’s website for public viewing. Items 2 through 5 listed under this subsection shall be in compliance with the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0, or a subsequent version, published by the Web Accessibility Initiative of the World Wide Web Consortium at a minimum Level AA success criteria. [See Government Code Section 11546.7(a).]

(c)The Commission shall make a ruling on the state agency’s Finding of Emergency as to its compliance with Government Code Section 11346.1. If the Finding of Emergency is approved, the Commission shall consider the proposed emergency building standard and make a ruling to approve, disapprove, further study required, or approve as amended, consistent with Section 1-417(a) of this article.

(d)The Commission shall file approved emergency building standards with the Secretary of State at the earliest possible date following approval. Following the filing with the Secretary of State for an adopted emergency building standard, the Commission shall notify the affected state agency in writing of the filing date of the emergency building standard.

(e)Following the initial adoption of emergency building standards and if determined appropriate, the state agency responsible for the emergency building standards shall proceed to complete the certifying rulemaking process to make the emergency building standards permanent within 180 days in accordance with Government Code Section 11346.1 and Health and Safety Code Section 18938. Rulemaking files submitted to the Commission for certifying rulemaking shall include all applicable documents required by Section 1-415 of this article.

(f)Readoption of an emergency building standard pursuant to Government Code Section 11346.1(h) requires sending a notice of proposed action pursuant to Government Code Section 11346.1(a)(2).

In addition to fulfilling the requirements for submission of building standard actions described in this section and Sections 1-407, 1-411, 1-415 and 1-420 of this article, as applicable, a state proposing or adopting agency requesting approval for readoption of an emergency building standard shall provide the following:

1.A written statement providing specific facts demonstrating by substantial evidence that the agency has made substantial progress and proceeded with diligence to comply with Government Code Section 11346.1(e); and either

2.A statement that the emergency circumstances are unchanged since the initial adoption or prior readoption; or

3.An updated finding of emergency required by Government Code Section 11346.1(b) to reflect circumstances that have changed since the initial adoption or readoption.

(g)Rulemaking files for readoption of emergency building standards submitted to the Commission for consideration shall include each of the following:

1.One (1) original Building Standards Notice/Submission Face Sheet (BSC-1), with the wet signature of the agency director or designee.

2.Two (2) copies of the Finding of Emergency previously approved by the Commission satisfying requirements of Government Code Section 11346.1 of this article.

3.Two (2) copies of the statement relative to substantial progress, and the statement that the emergency remains unchanged or an updated finding of emergency, as appropriate. The statements and updated finding shall incorporate the provisions of Section 1-419(f) of this article.

4.Two (2) copies of the Express Terms illustrating the approved/adopted emergency building standards.

5.Two (2) copies of the written Nine-Point Criteria Analysis substantiating compliance with Health and Safety Code Section 18930.

6.Any supporting documentation on which the approved/adopted emergency building standards are based.

7.One (1) electronic file copy of each of the above documents listed under subsection 1-419(g). The electronic documents shall be suitable for immediate placement on the Commission’s website for public viewing. Items 2 through 6 listed under this subsection shall be in compliance with the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0, or a subsequent version, published by the Web Accessibility Initiative of the World Wide Web Consortium at a minimum Level AA success criteria. [See Government Code Section 11546.7(a).]

Authority: Government Code Sections 11346.1 and 11346.5 and Health and Safety Code Sections 18930, 18937 and 18949.6.

Reference: Government Code Sections 11346.1, 11346.5 and 11546.7(a) and Health and Safety Code Sections 18913, 18930, 18935, 18937, 18938 and 18949.6.

1-420. State adopting agency submittals.

(a)All building standards and emergency building standards adopted by a state adopting agency must be approved by the Commission prior to codification pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18930. The submitted rulemaking file for approval shall satisfy all applicable provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act (Gov. Code, § 11340 et seq.).

(b)In accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 18935, the notice of proposed action and the initial statement of reasons shall be submitted to the Commission for review. The notice and the initial statement of reasons shall be submitted a minimum of 45 days in advance of the state adopting agency beginning its initial 45-day public comment period. Along with the notice and initial statement of reasons, the adopting agency shall include its initial express terms for review by the Commission.

After review and determination that the notice of proposed action and initial statement of reasons are in compliance with Article 5 of Chapter 3.5 of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code, the Commission shall approve the documents and notify the state adopting agency in writing within 5 calendar days of the approval. The Commission shall submit the notice of proposed action to the Office of Administrative Law (OAL) for publication in its California Regulatory Notice Register pursuant to OAL’s procedures.

(c)The submitted rulemaking files for adopted building standards and emergency building standards shall contain and comply with the applicable related provisions in Sections 1-415 and 1-419 of this article, as appropriate.

After any hearings, the close of all public comment periods and the state adopting agency receiving approval from its commission, board or other approving body, a final rulemaking file shall be submitted to the Commission. The final rulemaking file shall consist of Items 1 through 17 of Section 1-415 of this article. Each final rulemaking file shall be organized and indexed to identify all items comprising the final rulemaking file.

(d)A representative of the submitting state adopting agency shall be present at the Commission’s public meeting at which approval will be considered. The representative shall do the following:

1.Summarize the adopted building standards or emergency building standards.

2.Summarize the agency’s activities to satisfy requirements for rulemaking.

3.Respond to any questions by the Commission.

Authority: Government Code Section 11346 et seq., and Health and Safety Code Sections 18930 and 18949.6.

Reference: Government Code Section 11346 et seq., and Health and Safety Code Sections 18930, 18935, 18937 and 18949.6.

1-421. Change without regulatory effect.

(a)Notwithstanding the rulemaking procedures specified in Article 4 of this chapter, a proposing or adopting agency may add to, revise or delete text published in Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, with the approval of the Commission, when the change has no regulatory effect as provided in this section.

(b)A proposing or adopting agency acting pursuant to this section on provisions of Title 24 that are also adopted by other state agencies, shall obtain the written concurrence of the other agencies in regard to the change without regulatory effect.

(c)A change without regulatory effect is a change to the provisions of Title 24 that does not impose any new requirement for the design or construction of buildings and associated structures and equipment. A change without regulatory effect may include, but is not limited to:

1.Renumbering, reordering or relocating a regulatory provision;

2.Deleting a regulatory provision for which all statutory or constitutional authority has been repealed;

3.Deleting a regulatory provision held invalid in a judgment that has become final, entered by a California court of competent jurisdiction, a United States District Court located in the State of California, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, or the United States Supreme Court; however, the Commission shall not approve any proposed change without regulatory effect if the change is based on a superior court decision which invalidated the regulatory provision solely on the grounds that the underlying statute was unconstitutional;

4.Revising structure, syntax, cross-reference, grammar or punctuation;

5.Changing an “authority” or “reference” citation for a regulation; and

6.Making a regulatory provision consistent with a changed California statute if both of the following conditions are met:

(A) The regulatory provision is inconsistent with
and superseded by the changed statute, and

(B) The state adopting agency or state proposing agency has no discretion to adopt a change which differs in substance from the one chosen.

(d)The rulemaking file for a change without regulatory effect to be submitted to the Commission for adoption or approval, and publication in Title 24 shall include the following:

1.A completed Building Standards Face Sheet (BSC-1) as required by Section 1-415 of this chapter; and

2.Express Terms illustrating the change in the form required by Section 1-415 of this chapter; and

3.A written statement for each section explaining how the change meets the requirements of Subsection (c) above; and

4.Pursuant to Subsection (b) above, a written statement by each state Agency that has adopted the provision being changed, concurring with the regulatory change. All such statements shall be signed by a duly authorized representative of the Agency.

(e)The Commission shall make a determination regarding a change submitted pursuant this section within thirty (30) days of its receipt. Within ten (10) days of making a determination, the Commission shall send written notification of the determination to the agency that submitted the change when:

1.The Commission determines that the submitted change  meets the requirements of this section for a change without regulatory effect, the regulatory change shall be filed with the Secretary of State and the Commission shall publish the change in Title 24, California Code of Regulations.

2.The Commission determines that the submitted change does not meet the requirements of this section for a change without regulatory effect, or does not comply with the rulemaking requirements of this section, the written determination by the Commission shall provide sufficient itemization of the deficiencies. The agency may correct the rulemaking file for reconsideration by the Commission, or begin proceeding with a regulatory  action pursuant to Article 4 of this chapter.

(f)An adoption or approval by the Commission of a change without regulatory effect shall be effective 30 days after filing with the Secretary of State. Health and Safety Code Section 18938(c) establishes the effective date as being 30 days after filing the amendment or repeal by the Commission with the Secretary of State.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18929.1, 18930, 18931(f) and 18946.6.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18929.1, 18930, 18931(f) and 18946.6.

ARTICLE 5 CITY, COUNTY, AND CITY AND COUNTY BUILDING PERMIT FEES

1-501. Purpose.

This article establishes regulations for implementation of Health and Safety Code Sections 18931.6 and 18931.7, to require a surcharge on building permits in order to provide funds, upon appropriation, for the California Building Standards Commission, Department of Housing and Community Development and Office of the State Fire Marshal to use in carrying out the provisions of California Building Standards Law and of State Housing Law relating to building standards, with emphasis placed on the adoption, publication and educational efforts associated with green building standards. The fees are to be collected by cities, counties, and cities and counties and transmitted to the California Building Standards Commission. The fees are based on building permit valuation.

1-503. Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Section 1-103. Definitions of this Chapter:

Building Standards Administration Special Revolving Fund (the Fund).

Department.

Fees, fractions thereof.

Office.

1-505. Fee assessment.

(a)Fees shall be levied on building permits required for all disciplines covered by Title 24, including, but not limited to, building, electrical, mechanical and plumbing, and for which a valuation is made.

(b)Fees are assessed at a rate of $4 per $100,000, or fractions thereof, of each building permit valuation, but not less than $1 per permit, as shown in Table 1-505:

1.Cities, counties, and cities and counties may retain up to ten percent (10%) of the fees for related administrative costs, code enforcement, and education as permitted by Health and Safety Code Section 18931.6.

2.When a building permit is issued and no valuation is made, the city, county, or city and county may exempt that permit from fee assessment.

(c)The Commission may reduce the rate of the fee by regulation upon determination that a lesser fee is sufficient to carry out the programs of the Commission, the Department and the Office. The Commission may establish a termination date or duration for the fee reduction period.

Authority: Government Code Section 11346 et seq. and Health and Safety
Code Sections 18930.5, 18931(f), 18931.6, 18931.7 and 18949.6.

Reference: Government Code Section 11346 et seq. and Health and Safety
Code Sections 18930.5, 18931(f), 18931.6, 18931.7 and 18949.6.

TABLE 1-505

BUILDING PERMIT VALUATION FEE

BUILDING PERMIT VALUATION	FEE
$1 – $25,000	$1
$25,000.01 – $50,000	$2
$50,000.01 – $75,000	$3
$75,000.01 – $100,000	$4
Every $25,000 or fraction thereof above $100,000	Add $11-507. Fee collection.

(a)Cities, counties, and cities and counties shall submit fees each quarter, commencing with the quarter beginning January 1 and ending March 31, 2009, due on the 15th day of the following month.

1.Each quarter, a city, county, and city and county shall submit a completed Fee Report Form (BSC-2) and payment to the California Building Standards Commission for the fees collected that quarter.

2.A Contact Information Form (BSC-3) shall accompany the Fee Report Form and payment only when contact information changes. Such changes include the city, county, or city and county address, telephone number(s), office or department contact, and/or building official.

3. For a check payment, the check shall be mailed together with the certified quarterly Fee Report Form (BSC-2) and Contact Information Form as appropriate, to the California Building Standards Commission, 2525 Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento, CA 95833. For an electronic payment (see Note), the payment receipt shall be emailed together with the certified quarterly Fee Report Form (BSC-2), and Contact Information Form as appropriate, to BSASRF_Fee@dgs.ca.gov.

Note: Only the CBSC-approved electronic payment platform shall be used for electronic payments. Forms, a detailed guidebook and information regarding the electronic payment platform are available at the Commission’s Building Permit Fee webpage -  dgs.ca.gov/BSC/BSASRF---The-Building-Permit-Fee.

(b)The Commission shall deposit the moneys collected
into the Building Standards Administration Special Revolving Fund for use, upon appropriation, by the Commission, the
Department, and the Office as specified in Section 1-501.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18909(c), 18929, 18930.5,
18931.6, 18931.7 and 18949.6.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18930.5, 18931.6 and 18931.7.

1-509. Request for refund of fees.

(a)When a city, county or city and county determines that excess fees were paid in error due to a miscalculation, a written request for refund may be filed with the California Building Standards Commission, 2525 Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento, CA 95833. The request for refund shall be submitted with all of the following:

1.A detailed summary describing the circumstances surrounding the miscalculation that occurred regarding the incorrect submission of fees;

2.Documentation that demonstrates how the amount error occurred, and showing the correct amount;

3.Written certification that the refund amount is accurate and true.

(b)Receipt of a request for refund of fees shall be acknowledged by the California Building Standards Commission in writing within 45 days of receipt. The acknowledgement shall include whether additional supporting documentation is required in order to verify the refund amount.

(c)Should a city, county, or city and county be delinquent in any past quarterly fee submissions, the past due quarterly fee reports and respective payments shall be made current prior to resolution regarding a refund.

Authority: Health and Safety Code Sections 18909(c), 18929, 18930.5,
18931.6, 18931.7 and 18949.6.

Reference: Health and Safety Code Sections 18930.5, 18931.6 and 18931.7.

