CHAPTER 16 CALIFORNIA STATE LIBRARY

ARTICLE 1 SCOPE

16-101. Application.

These regulations apply to public library projects for which funds have been granted under the Library Construction and Renovation Bond Act of 1988, Proposition 85 (1988), Education Code Sections 19950-19981.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Sections 19957 and 19961.

ARTICLE 2 DEFINITIONS

16-201. Definitions.

In this chapter, the following definitions apply:

PROJECT means the construction or renovation project for which an application has been approved by the Board.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Sections 19957 and 19961 (c).

BOND ACT means the California Library Construction and Renovation Bond Act of 1988, Proposition 85 (1988), Education Code Sections 19950-19981.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Section 19950.

BOARD means the California Library Construction and Renovation Board.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Section 19952 (c).

FACILITY means a building used for public library service and operated or intended to be operated by a jurisdiction under authority of an Education Code provision to provide public library service. The owner of a facility may be a jurisdiction other than the operator of the facility.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Section 19957.

INITIATOR means a description of a proposed change order together with a request for a cost estimate for the change order, prepared for transmission to the contractor by the project architect or similar official representing the owner. An “initiator” is sometimes referred to as a “bulletin.”

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Sections 19957, 19962 and 19965.

STATE LIBRARIAN means the State Librarian or a duly authorized representative of the State Librarian.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Section 19960.

ARTICLE 3 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

16-301. Local responsibility for plan checking and inspection.

The local building official of the jurisdiction responsible for the site upon which the facility is located is responsible for routine plan checking and on-site inspections for compliance with local building codes, regulations and requirements.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Section 19958 (b).

16-302. Required submissions to the state librarian before putting a project to bid.

(a)No project shall receive Bond Act funds if it has been put to bid before the State Librarian has reviewed and approved, in sequence, the following submissions of design and fiscal documents:

1.The building program, schematic designs and outline specifications, and a current project budget.

2.Preliminary plans and specifications (also known as 100 percent design development documents), and a current project budget.

3.Working drawings and specifications and contract language (also known as construction documents or contract documents), and a current project budget. This submission shall be prior to the local plan check.

4.Any revisions to the approved set of schematic designs, preliminary plans, or any revisions to the approved set of working drawings, specifications and contract clauses, including any resulting from the local plan check if they affect library operations or project scope.

(b)Projects which, at the time of approval of their application by the Board, have completed any of the design documents in the preceding subsection, shall after approval of the application submit the building program and the most current set of design documents to the State Librarian for the required review, in the number of copies specified by the State Librarian. Earlier versions need not be submitted.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Section 19960.

Exception: Submission requirements shall differ from those in the preceding section for the designs of the following projects:

1.Projects solely for energy conservation shall submit an energy audit by a qualified engineer or architect, instead of a building program.

2.Projects whose total cost is less than $200,000, including any contiguous work not included in the approved project, shall omit the submission of the preliminary plans and specifications.

3.Projects governed by this section shall provide all other required submissions.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Section 19957.

16-303. Notification of submission dates.

Grantees shall periodically provide the State Librarian an amended schedule of dates when the required initial submissions of building programs and schematic, preliminary and working drawings will be made. Submissions received within twenty-two (22) working days of the date specified on the most recent amended schedule received from the grantee at least thirty (30) working days prior to the submission shall be reviewed within the time periods specified in this Article.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Sections 19957 and 19960.

16-304. Time period for review of submissions prior to bid.

(a)The State Librarian shall review:

1.The initial submission of building programs, schematic drawings and outline specifications, and current project budget within fifteen (15) working days after receipt.

2.The initial submission of preliminary plans and specifications, and current project budget within fifteen (15) working days after receipt.

3.The initial submission of working drawings, specifications and contract clauses within thirty (30) working days after receipt.

(b)The State Librarian shall approve any required resubmissions or any changes to approved designs and documents prior to bid, within five (5) working days after receipt.

(c)If the submission is received more than twenty-two (22) working days earlier or later than the date specified on the most recent amended schedule received from the grantee at least thirty (30) working days prior to the submission, the State Librarian may extend the review period for that submission by ten (10) working days.

(d)Following the time period for review, the State Librarian shall either approve the submission or notify the submitter of the deficiencies that are to be corrected. If the State Librarian does neither, the submission is approved as submitted.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Section 19960.

16-305. Change orders.

(a)Following local award of the construction contract for the project, the grantee shall submit to the State Librarian a copy of each initiator, regardless of its nature, no later than the same time it is forwarded to the contractor.

(b)The State Librarian shall, within three working days of receipt of the initiator, review all initiators that if issued as change orders would:

1.Affect library operations, including but not limited to work that affects the location or number of any bookstacks, storage shelving, doorways or direction of swing of doors, paths of travel and circulation, access to any library equipment, materials and services, or use of spaces. Any such initiators shall be accompanied by a statement by the local library director describing how the change will be accommodated in the operational program following completion of the construction; or,

2.Change the scope of the project, including the project budget if the change would reduce the local contribution to the project.

(c)Upon receipt of any initiator requiring review in accordance with the preceding subsection, the State Librarian shall:

1.Approve the change order; or,

2.Return the initiator for resubmission, for a specified reason, in which case the resubmission will be reviewed within three days of its receipt; or,

3.Notify the submitter than an additional period not to exceed five days will be required to gather specified additional information. No further additional time shall be taken for this reason.

(d)If the State Librarian does not act in accordance with the preceding subsection, the change order may be issued as submitted.

(e)All other change orders may be issued without the State Librarian’s approval.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Sections 19957, 19962 and 19965.

16-306. Review of building programs, schematic designs, specifications and budget.

The State Librarian shall review and approve building programs, schematic designs, outline specifications and the current project budget to ensure that:

(a)The building program conforms to general principles of library planning as included in Nolan Lushington, Libraries Designed for Users (1979); Raymond Holt, Wisconsin Library Building Handbook (1978); Aaron Cohen, Designing and Space Planning for Libraries (1979), or similar standard public library planning works, and as supplemented by subsequent standard journal literature on changing concepts of library service.

(b)The schematic designs and outline specifications appropriately interpret the building program, provide functional arrangements and a practical design.

(c)The current project budget is appropriate to the approved program and to the schematic designs and outline specifications.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Section 19957.

16-307. Review of preliminary plans, specifications and budget.

The State Librarian shall review and approve preliminary plans and specifications and the current project budget to ensure that:

(a)The preliminary plans carry out the approved schematic design concepts without significant change.

(b)The support systems are appropriate to meet program requirements, accessible and reasonably laid out.

(c)There are no obvious code compliance problems.

(d)The current project budget is appropriate to the approved program and to the preliminary designs.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Section 19957.

16-308. Review of working drawings, specifications, budget and contract language.

The State Librarian shall review and approve working drawings and specifications, the current project budget, and contract language to ensure that:

(a)The systems and design are compatible with the programmatic needs of the library and the requirements of the State Building Code.

(b)The design reflects prudent principles of public works buildings design and good construction practice.

(c)The systems in the design documents are well coordinated.

(d)The current project budget is appropriate to the approved program and to the working drawing designs.

(e)The construction contract provides for all relevant requirements of the Bond Act, of the regulations adopted under authority of Education Code Section 19960, and of the project documents.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Section 19957.

16-309. Arbitration if fail to agree on comments.

(a)If the grantee and the State Librarian cannot agree on disposition of comments by the State Librarian at any of the reviews by the State Librarian, the State Librarian shall provide to the grantee a list of three experts qualified in the appropriate discipline. The experts shall not have previously been involved with the project. The grantee shall choose one of them to decide the issue, and shall pay the expert’s costs and customary fees. The expert’s decision shall be binding on both parties.

(b)If the issue relates to code interpretation, its disposition shall use the jurisdiction’s local code appeals process.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Section 19957.

16-310. Bookstacks.

(a)No bookstacks may be installed, remodeled or moved until the State Librarian has reviewed and approved in sequence the following:

1.Specifications for the bookstacks, which implement the standards in Part 2 of the State Building Code, and

2.The local review of the contractor’s calculations showing that the installation meets the specification.

This requirement applies to bookstacks to be installed, remodeled or moved in any project receiving Bond Act funds. It also applies both to bookstacks included in the local construction contract and to bookstacks contracted for separately from the local construction contract, but installed within one year of the completion of the local construction contract.

(b)The grantee or its successor in interest shall ensure that any bookstacks installed, moved or remodeled in any project during the twenty (20) years following acceptance of the project by the local jurisdiction having title to the facility conform to the specifications for library bookstacks in the State Building Code applicable to the project at the time of project completion.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Sections 19957 (f) and 19967 (a).

16-311. Floor loads.

If any floor areas in a project are adjacent to bookstacks and are potentially available for future installation of bookstacks, even if not originally so intended, those areas shall conform to the same floor load standards as required for the book-stacks.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Section 19957.

16-312. Remodeling.

(a)Remodeling and renovation of public library facilities constructed prior to 1973 shall conform to the Uniform Building Code requirements for remodeling, except that:

1.Remodeling and renovation of facilities classified as qualified historical buildings or structures under Health and Safety Code Section 18955 shall meet the requirements of the State Historical Building Code instead of the requirements of the Uniform Building Code.

2.Remodeling or renovation projects that include unreinforced masonry shall conform to Chapter 1 of the Appendix to the Uniform Code for Building Conservation, 1987. If a jurisdiction with a remodeling or renovation project that includes unreinforced masonry has adopted a local earthquake hazard mitigation program that requires strengthening such structures, the jurisdiction may instead follow its local program.

(b)Remodeling and renovation of public library facilities constructed in 1973 or later, or parts of public library facilities, shall for the facility, or each respective part of a facility, conform to the codes in effect at the time of original construction for the facility or for the respective part. If the remodeling and renovation is for a facility that had previously been remodeled, or for one or more parts that had previously been remodeled, and such previous remodeling required that the facility or respective parts of the facility were brought up to the code in effect at the time of previous remodeling, then the remodeling funded by Bond Act moneys shall conform to the code in effect at the time of previous remodeling rather than the code in effect at the time of original construction of the respective parts of the facility.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Section 19957.

16-313. Access to construction and records.

The grantee shall provide the State Librarian reasonable access to the construction site and to project records.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Section 19960.

ARTICLE 4 FEES

16-401. Project administration fee.

(a)For purposes of this section, “project cost” means the entire cost of a project, paid by state and local funds combined, including the cost of bookstacks whether or not in the construction contract, and of furnishings if credited under Education Code Section 19962 (d), but excluding the cost of land acquired under Education Code Section 19957 (b) or the value of land donated or otherwise acquired and credited to the project under Education Code Section 19962 (c).

(b)The State Librarian may charge a project administration fee for each project of one-half of one percent (.5%) of project cost.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Sections 19957, 19960 and 19962.

16-402. Allowable fees and costs as allowable bond act costs.

Any fees or costs authorized in this Division, including work required to meet Title 24 requirements, may be included in Bond Act project costs. Costs of resolving a code interpretation dispute with the local building official may not be included in Bond Act costs.

Authority: Education Code Section 19960.

Reference: Education Code Sections 19957 (g) and 19958 (b) (4).

HISTORY:

1.(DOE-A 1/89) Adopt CCR, Title 24, Part 1, Chapter 16, effective 12-1-89. Approved by the Building Standards Commission 10-30-89.

ARTICLE 5 CALIFORNIA READING AND LITERACY IMPROVEMENT AND PUBLIC LIBRARY CONSTRUCTION AND RENOVATION BOND ACT OF 2000

Article 5.1. Scope.

16-510. Applicability.

These regulations apply to public library projects for which funds have been granted under the California Reading and Literacy Improvement and Library Construction and Renovation Bond Act of 2000. Education Code Sections 19985-20011.

Authority: Education Code Section 19992.

Reference: Education Code Sections 19989 and 19993.

Article 5.2. Definitions.

16-520. Definitions.

In this chapter, the following definitions apply:

ADDENDUM—a description of a proposed change to the approved plans or specifications prior to bid for construction.

ADDITION—a project that increases the floor area of enclosed space of an existing building. Addition also means expansion.

ARCHITECT—an architect holding a valid license under Chapter 3, Division 3, of the California Business and Professions Code.

ASSIGNABLE SQUARE FOOTAGE—the usable space within the defining walls of the building assigned to furniture and equipment but does not include any nonassignable space.

BOARD—the California Public Library Construction and Renovation Board.

BOND ACT—the California Reading and Literacy Improvement and Public Library Construction and Renovation Bond Act of 2000, Education Code, Sections 19985-20011.

BUILDING CODE—the California Building Standards Code, Title 24, California Code of Regulations.

CHANGE ORDER—a description of a proposed change, together with a cost estimate for the change order, prepared for transmission from the contractor to the project architect or similar official representing the owner.

CONSTRUCTION COST ESTIMATOR—an individual who has had responsibility for five or more construction project cost estimates in excess of $1,000,000 each within the previous 10 years prior to the Board’s application deadline.

CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS INSTITUTE, or CSI—a technical association providing product and specification information to its members.

DESIGN DOCUMENTS—plans, specifications and all other documents appropriate for the design phase of a project.

DIVISION OF THE STATE ARCHITECT, or DSA—the Division of the State Architect, Department of General Services, State of California.

FACILITY—a building used for public library service and operated or intended to be operated by a local jurisdiction to provide public library service. The owner of a facility may be a jurisdiction other than the operator of the facility.

FENESTRATION—the arrangement, proportioning and design of exterior and interior windows, clerestories, skylights, window walls and doors in a building.

GROSS SQUARE FOOTAGE—the entire area of the building interior including the exterior wall thickness. The total of the assignable square footage and the nonassignable square footage equals the gross square footage.

LIBRARY BUILDING PROGRAM—the planning document that describes the space requirements and all other general building considerations required for the design of a public library building.

NONASSIGNABLE SPACE—utility areas of a building required for the function of the building, including stairways; elevators; corridors and interior walkways; public lobbies; restrooms; duct shafts; mechanical rooms; electrical closets; telecommunications closets for voice, data, electrical, security and fire systems; janitor’s closets; fireplaces; interior and exterior wall thickness; and exterior amenities that are part of the building but not enclosed, such as loading docks and covered patios, porches and walkways.

PLANS—the architectural and engineering drawings associated with a project such as, but not limited to, vicinity maps, site plans, foundation plans, floor plans, reflected ceiling plans, roof plans, cross sections, interior elevations, exterior elevations and details.

PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER—an engineer holding a valid certificate under Chapter 7, Division 3, of the California Business and Professions Code, in that branch of engineering that is applicable.

PROJECT—the construction, renovation and/or addition project for which an application has been awarded a grant by the Board.

READERS’ SEATS—all seating in the library available for the public of all ages to use while reading print materials (i.e., lounge seating, benches, floor cushions, seating at tables, carrels and study counters). Readers’ seats do not include technology workstations.

REMODELING, REHABILITATION AND RENOVATION—a construction change within, or to, an existing building.

STATE LIBRARIAN—the California State Librarian or a duly authorized representative of the State Librarian.

STATE LIBRARY—the California State Library.

STATE LIBRARY PLANS REVIEW FORM—the form used by California State Library staff to comment on each design phase plan submittal. (See Appendix.)

TECHNOLOGY WORKSTATIONS—workstations in the library of any form (e.g., tables, carrels, counters, office systems) available for the public of all ages to use while operating any kind of library provided electronic or audiovisual technology [i.e., personal computers, computer terminals, online public access computers (OPAC’s), audio and video units, ADA adaptive technology and microform readers].

Authority: Education Code Section 19992.

Reference: Education Code Sections 19985, 19986(c), 19989, 19992, 19995 and 19997.

Article 5.3 Administration and enforcement. All library bond act projects.

16-530. Local responsibility for permitting, plan checking and construction inspections.

Local building official responsibilities. The local building official of the jurisdiction responsible for the site upon which the facility is located is responsible for routine plan checking and on-site inspections for compliance with state and local building codes, regulations and requirements.

Authority: Education Code Section 19992.

Reference: Education Code Section 19992.

Article 5.4. Administration and enforcement. All library bond act projects, including all joint use projects.

16-540. Required submission to the State Librarian before putting a project to bid.

(a)State Librarian review and accept before bid. No project awarded Library Bond Act funds shall be put to bid before the State Librarian has reviewed and accepted, in sequence, the submissions of design documents and final cost estimate as set forth in Section 16-542.

(b)Projects that have completed any of the design documents at grant award not required to submit earlier versions. Projects that, at the time of approval of their application by the Board, have completed any of the design documents in Section 16-542 shall, after grant award, submit a copy of the final library building program and the most current set of design documents to the State Librarian for the required review. Earlier versions need not be submitted.

Authority: Education Code Section 19992.

Reference: Education Code Section 19993.

16-541. Timetable for architectural and engineering plans and specifications review and acceptance.

(a)Conceptual plans and outline specifications review. Conceptual plans shall be returned to the grant recipient within 15 working days after the grant award by the Board.

(b)State Librarian plans review. The State Librarian shall review and accept:

1.Schematic design plans and specifications review. The review period for schematic documents [See Section 16-542(h)] is 15 working days after receipt.

2.Design development plans and specifications review. The review period for design development documents [See Section 16-542(i)] is 21 working days after receipt.

3.Construction documents and specifications review. The review period for construction documents [see Section 16-542(j)] is 30 working days after receipt.

4.Final review of construction documents. The review period for final construction documents [see Section 16-542(k)], before going to bid, is five working days after receipt. Final review shall occur after all local jurisdictional approvals have been obtained.

(c)Revision to previously accepted set of design documents. The State Librarian shall review and accept, within 10 working days after receipt, any revisions to a previously accepted set of design documents, including any revisions resulting from the local plan check, that affect the following:

1.Alter use of space. Alter the proposed use of all or part of the library building;

2.Change square footage of space. Change the square footage by 10 percent or more of a building space identified in the grant recipient's building program, and in the most recently accepted set of design documents;

3.Decrease library components. Decrease the number of collections, readers seats, technology workstations, staff workstations and offices, meeting room seating by more than 10 percent;

4.Change in building systems with negative impacts. Change the lighting, power or data distribution systems in a manner that negatively impacts the use of the building, furniture and equipment by the public or staff;

5.Modify access compliance. Modify access compliance from most recently accepted set of design documents;

6.Functional layout. Change the layout of the library furniture and equipment in a way that negatively affects the functional operation of the facility as a library.

(d)State Librarian acceptance. Following the time period for review, the State Librarian shall either accept or notify the grant recipient of the deficiencies that are to be corrected. If the State Librarian does neither, the submission is accepted as submitted.

(e)Plans and specifications submittal review period extension. The State Librarian may extend the plans review period up to 15 additional working days if potential design or construction defects are identified in the plans and specifications. A letter of notification of the additional 15 working day review period will be sent to the grant recipient.

Authority: Education Code Section 19992.

Reference: Education Code Sections 19989 and 19993.

16-542. Submittal requirements for architectural and engineering plans and specifications review and acceptance.

(a)Address for plans submittal. The address for plans submittal shall be:

Library Bond Act Manager

Office of Library Construction

California State Library

1029 J Street, Suite 400

Sacramento, CA 95814-2825

(b)State Librarian review and acceptance of architectural and engineering plans. The State Librarian shall review and accept, in sequence, the final library building program, the architectural and engineering plans, and the construction cost estimates. For each submittal of schematic plans, design development plans and construction documents, the grant recipient shall submit to the California State Library, the following:

1.Number of sets of plans required. Four sets of plans and specifications; and

2.One copy of all supporting documents required. One copy of all other documentation as designated in this section for each design phase.

(c)Sheet numbering. All plan sheets shall be identified by a sheet number and shall be cross-referenced. Sheet numbers shall also correspond to a sheet index on the title sheet.

(d)Preliminary, detailed and final construction cost estimates. An independent, professional construction cost estimator who is not an employee of the grant recipient or library service provider shall provide the preliminary construction cost estimate for the schematic design plans and specifications review, the detailed construction cost estimate for the design development plans and specifications review, and the final construction cost estimate for the construction documents and specifications review. All estimates shall be priced out at the current market conditions prevailing at the time the plans and specifications are submitted to the State Library.

(e)Incomplete submittals. If the State Library determines that any design plan submittal is incomplete or incorrect, the grant recipient will be notified of the missing or incorrect documents within five days of receipt of the submittal. The time period for State Librarian review will not begin until the missing or corrected documents are submitted to the State Library.

(f)State Library plans review form. In response to any design phase review, State Library comments shall be documented on a State Library Plans Review Form (see Appendix) and returned to the grant recipient. The grant recipient shall address each State Library comment on the plans or specifications, making appropriate changes and noting on the State Library Plans Review Form each change made and where it can be found on the drawings or in the specifications. The grant recipient shall return one copy of this revised form to the State Library at the next required design phase submittal.

(g)Conceptual plans and outline specifications review. Conceptual plans and outline specifications previously submitted with an application shall be sent with State Library comments to the grant recipient. The grant recipient shall incorporate these comments into the schematic design plans and specifications.

(h)Schematic design plans and specifications review. The grant recipient shall provide the following:

1.Final library building program. A final library building program.

2.Preliminary code information. Preliminary code information documented on the title sheet of drawings including occupancy, construction type, site and building access, any applicable seismic and energy provisions, planning and environmental compliance information, and any other code applications to specific project conditions.

3.Site plan. A site plan showing the library building, parking (including number of spaces and location of accessible parking), and trees or other features that must remain in their original locations, and access drives as well as any anticipated future expansion of the building and parking. The site plan shall have a north arrow. Property lines shall be shown clearly as determined by the boundary survey completed as part of the grant application.

4.Floor plans. Floor plans of the spaces listed in the library building program and identified by the area/space name assigned in the library building program. Show all columns and identify all functional areas, including all nonassignable spaces.

5.Furniture and equipment plan. A furniture and equipment plan that identifies all furniture and equipment based on the library building program. The furniture and equipment plan shall be a computer-generated drawing, drawn to scale. Show all columns and coordinate with the floor plan. Show critical dimensions for the following: overall dimensions, dimensions between columns, dimensions for exiting and access compliance, and other dimensions that demonstrate the required quantity of furniture and equipment will fit into the proposed building, and allow for full code compliance and functioning of the facility.

6.Assignable square footage tabulation. A tabulation of the assignable square footage for each area called for in the final library building program compared to the assignable square footage shown on the floor plan.

7.Collection tabulation. A tabulation of the number of books, magazines and audiovisual materials called for in the library building program compared to the number of books, magazines and audiovisual materials that can be housed given the proposed furniture and equipment plan. The tabulation shall also provide the conversion factors utilized (books per double-faced unit, or books per linear foot).

8.Technology workstations tabulation. A tabulation of the number of technology workstations by area called for in the library building program compared to the number of technology workstations shown on the furniture and equipment plan.

9.Readers’ seats tabulation. A tabulation of the number of readers’ seats by area called for in the library building program compared to the number of readers’ seats shown on the furniture and equipment plan.

10.Exterior elevations. Elevations of all four sides of the building showing general locations of openings, roof lines and grade lines.

11.Roof plan. A roof plan showing roofing material, roof slope and direction of slope; roof overhangs and major elements and their relationship to the exterior wall of the building.

12.Building sections. Two sections through the building, one longitudinal and one latitudinal.

13.Engineering plans and specifications.

A.Civil. On-site and off-site utilities, fire protection, drainage, paving and grading.

B.Structural. Basic structural materials and systems, analyses and development of design solutions.

C.Mechanical. Energy source, heating, ventilating and air conditioning (HVAC), conservation, plumbing, fire protection and security systems.

D.Electrical. Power, data, communication, lighting, fire and security systems, and general space requirements.

E.Landscape. Conceptual design solutions for land forms, lawns and plantings based on program requirements, physical site characteristics, design and environmental objectives.

14.Outline specifications. Outline specifications describing the type and quality of building systems, basic components, and components unique to the project. Outline specifications for the engineering disciplines listed in Item 13, “Engineering plans and specifications” shall be included.

15.Preliminary construction cost estimate. A preliminary construction cost estimate consisting of a projected cost for the construction project based on the most recent schematic design studies, current and historic area, volume or other unit costs. The estimate shall include an assemblies (or CSI format) estimate summary.

(i)Design development plans and specifications review. The grant recipient shall provide the following:

1.Site plan. A site plan showing all buildings dimensioned from adjacent structures or other critical site features, datum elevations at all entries, street lines and grades, property lines, required setbacks, easements, parking, sidewalks, preliminary site and exterior building lighting scheme with identification of fixture types, and routing of sewer, water, gas and other utilities, and site detailing showing typical external elements.

2.Floor plans. Floor plans showing complete functional layout, room designations, all major dimensions, all critical dimensions and all columns.

3.Exterior elevations. Elevations showing full-height facades, type and extent of exterior finishes, all openings including fenestration and overall vertical building heights related to established building datum. Indicate treatment of visible mechanical equipment and abutting topography and grade relationship.

4.Roof plan. A roof plan delineating roofing materials, direction and slope of roof; relationship of exterior wall to roof, overhangs and covered areas; mechanical equipment areas and screening; and location and major dimensions for major roof elements.

5.Building sections. Two building sections (one longitudinal and one latitudinal) showing the overall building solution with typical wall construction, foundation, parapet design, insulation methods, window, mechanical penetrations impact, relationship of various levels, floor to ceiling heights, and ceiling height and bookstack height coordination anticipating code-compliant fire sprinkler installation.

6.Details. Detail sheets showing key conditions, such as window and frame types, frame and door types, typical wall types and nontypical design-related detailing.

7.Interior elevations. Interior elevations showing typical and special spaces, and any built-in cabinetry or counter items. These drawings shall be of pre-final quality adequate to convey design intent. Basic dimensions shall be delineated, along with casework, counters and other built-ins, with heights and depths shown.

8.Reflected ceiling plan. Reflected ceiling plan integrated to show structural, mechanical and electrical impacts, including low voltage systems; e.g., security, audiovisual and public address system speakers.

9.Schedules. Schedules are to be nonrepetitive and comprehensive with keying to floor plans and elevations; pre-final interior finishes, frame and door, window and glazing, and preliminary hardware.

10.Furniture, furnishings and equipment plan. Furniture, furnishings and equipment plan with any special interior design features. Preliminary documentation of materials, finishes and colors.

11.Signage schedule and plan. Signage schedule and plan indicating the size, type and nomenclature of all interior signs.

12.Assignable square footage comparison. A tabulation of the assignable square footage for each area called for in the final library building program compared to the assignable square footage shown on the floor plan. Any changes from the accepted schematic plans shall be highlighted.

13.Engineering plans and specifications.

A.Civil. Grading, drainage and preliminary details for on-site and off-site work.

B.Structural. Basic structural system and dimensions, structural and foundation design criteria, and preliminary sizing of major structural components.

C.Mechanical. Preliminary equipment and duct layout, approximate equipment sizes and capacities, required space for equipment, chases and clearance coordination with structural, acoustical and energy conservation measures and visual impacts.

D.Plumbing. Preliminary plumbing lines routing within the building, point of entry of water, gas, storm drains, and sewer to building and preliminary details.

E.Electrical. Electrical site plan. Preliminary lighting plan and fixture schedule, single line diagram, preliminary power, data, and communication plans, security and fire alarm plans, and low-voltage plans.

(1)Lighting system plan. Lighting system plan overlaid on the furnishings, equipment and signage plan. Show all sources of artificial illumination with a legend that indicates the type of light fixture.

(2)Catalog “cut” sheets. Catalog “cut” sheets for each lighting fixture showing the fixture configuration, type and lens. The cut sheets must be keyed to the legend on the plans for quick identification.

(3)Electrical and data distribution systems plan. Electrical and data distribution systems plan overlaid on the furnishings, equipment and signage plan. Show all service panel boards, power outlets, telephone, data communication outlets and audiovisual outlets with a legend that indicates the type of outlets. Also include locations of book detection gates and security system components (surveillance cameras, motion and glass break detectors, magnetic door contacts and card access system readers), and public address system speaker locations.

F.Landscape. Preliminary planting and irrigation plans with preliminary details.

14.Draft specifications. Draft specifications including comprehensive, abbreviated descriptions of size, character and quality of methods, materials and systems. Coordinate specifications with the drawings. Use Construction Specifications Institute (CSI) format with applicable section numbers. Include all engineering specifications, and special or supplementary conditions specific to the project.

15.Detailed construction cost estimate. A detailed construction cost estimate and summary shall be prepared updating and refining the preliminary construction cost estimate of the project. The following shall be shown: (1) a breakdown for each major area of construction work in CSI format; (2) all estimates shall include individual item unit costs (materials, labor and equipment); quantities and total quantity costs; (3) sales tax; general contractor’s construction indirects (general conditions, overhead and profit); subcontractor’s mark-ups shall be listed separately; (4) the estimate shall separate the project's building costs from site and utilities costs.

(j)Construction documents and specifications review. The grant recipient shall provide the following:

1.Complete set of construction documents. A complete set of construction documents including all drawings, and specifications, structural calculations and energy load calculations in accordance with the Building Code; and contract language, along with all other documentation required as part of the bid package. All building systems must be delineated fully to illustrate their proposed scope and functions.

2.Final construction cost estimate. A detailed final construction cost estimate and summary shall be prepared in CSI format, updating and refining the detailed construction cost estimate, including: (1) individual line items, unit costs (materials, labor and equipment); quantities and total quantity costs; (2) sales tax; general contractor's construction indirects (general conditions, overhead and profit); subcontractor’s mark-ups shall be listed separately; and (3) the estimate shall separate the project’s building costs from site and utilities costs.

(k)Final review of construction documents. Once the State Librarian has accepted the construction documents and all the local code compliance reviews have been completed, the grant recipient shall send to the State Library one final copy of stamped and signed plans and specifications, which will be used by contractors when providing their bids. All sheets of the plans shall be signed, as well as the specifications cover by the architect or appropriate engineer.

(l)Access compliance. Grant recipient, upon receipt of DSA approval, shall provide documentation of DSA Access Compliance approval for the project to the State Librarian. (See Access Compliance by the Division of the State Architect authority as cited in Government Code, Section 4450 et. seq., and the compliance procedures found in California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Code of Regulations, Part 1, Sections 5-101 et. seq.)

Authority: Education Code Section 19992.

Reference: Education Code Sections 19989 and 19993.

16-543. Bookstacks.

(a)Bookstack installation acceptance. No bookstacks may be installed, remodeled or moved until the State Librarian has reviewed and accepted in sequence the following:

1.Specifications for the bookstacks. Specifications for the bookstacks, which implement the standards in Volume 2 of the California Building Code; and

2.Local review and approval of bookstack installation. The local review and approval of the bookstack contractor’s calculations showing that the installation meets the specification.

(b)Requirement for bookstacks installed at a later date. The requirement in Section 16-543(a) applies to bookstacks to be installed, remodeled or moved in any project receiving Library Bond Act funds. It also applies both to bookstacks included in the local construction contract and to bookstacks contracted for separately from the local construction contract, but installed within one year of the completion of the local construction contract.

(c)Bookstack installation must meet specifications for 40 years. The grant recipient or its successor in interest shall ensure that any bookstacks installed, moved or remodeled in any project during the 40 years following acceptance of the project by the local jurisdiction having title to the facility conform to the specifications for library bookstacks in the California Building Code.

Authority: Education Code Section 19992.

Reference: Education Code Sections 19989 and 19999(a).

16-544. Floor loads.

(a)Standards for floor loads. Implement the standards in Volume 2 of the California Building Code.

(b)Floor load for adjacent areas to bookstacks. If any floor areas in a project are adjacent to bookstacks and the bookstacks may expand to these adjacent areas, even if not originally so intended, those areas shall conform to the same floor load standards as required for the bookstacks. (Refer to California Building Code, Volume 2.)

Authority: Education Code Section 19992.

Reference: Education Code Section 19989.

16-545. Renovations.

(a)Public library renovation requirements. Renovation of public library facilities shall conform to the California Building Standards Code, Title 24, California Code of Regulations requirements for renovation, except that:

1.Renovation projects—California Historical Building Code. Renovation of facilities classified as qualified historical buildings or structures under Health and Safety Code Section 18955 shall meet the requirements of the California Historical Building Code (Part 8) instead of the requirements of the California Building Standards Code, Title 24, California Code of Regulations.

2.Renovation projects—California Code for Building Conservation. Renovation projects that include unreinforced masonry shall conform to Part 10 of the California Building Standards Code, the California Code for Building Conservation.

Authority: Education Code Section 19992.

Reference: Education Code Section 19989.

16-546. State Librarian acceptance of addenda and change orders.

(a)Changes in accepted plans. Changes of the accepted plans or specifications shall be made by means of an addendum or change order sent to the address specified in Section 16-542(a).

(b)Addendum and change order types requiring State Librarian review. A grant recipient shall submit to the State Librarian for review and acceptance addenda or change orders that would:

1.Alter use of space. Alter the proposed use of all or part of the library building;

2.Change square footage of space. Change the square footage by 10 percent or more of a building space identified in the grant recipient's building program, and in the final construction documents accepted by the State Librarian;

3.Decrease library components. Decrease the number of collections, readers’ seats, technology workstations, staff workstations and offices, meeting room seating by more than 10 percent;

4.Change in building systems with negative impacts. Change the lighting, power or data distribution systems in a manner that negatively impacts the use of the building, furniture and equipment by the public or staff.

5.Modify access compliance. Modify access compliance from what was approved by Division of State Architect's Access Compliance unit.

(c)Addendum and change order requirements. Addenda and change orders shall state the reason for the change and the scope of work to be provided, and where necessary, supplementary drawings shall be furnished to clearly describe the change.

(d)Acceptance of addenda or change orders. Upon receipt of any addenda or change orders requiring review in accordance with the preceding subsections, the State Librarian shall, within three working days of receipt, review and:

1.Accept. Accept the addendum or change order; or

2.Return for resubmission. Return the addendum or change order, stating the reasons why it was not accepted, for revision or additional justification and resubmission.

(e)Addenda or change orders issued as submitted. If the State Librarian has not accepted or returned the addendum or change order within three working days, the addendum or change order may be issued as submitted.

(f)All other project addenda and change orders. All addenda or change orders not covered by Section 16-546(b) shall be issued without the State Librarian's review and acceptance.

Authority: Education Code Section 19992.

Reference: Education Code Sections 19989, 19995 and 19997.

16-547. State Access to construction and records.

Access to construction site and project records. The grant recipient shall provide the State Librarian reasonable access to the construction site and to project records.

Authority: Education Code Section 19992.

Reference: Education Code Sections 19992 and 19993.

Article 5.5. Fees.

16-550. Allowable fees and costs as allowable bond act costs.

Allowable project fees and costs. Any fees or costs authorized in these regulations pursuant to the Library Bond Act, including work required to meet California Building Standards Code requirements, may be included as eligible Library Bond Act project costs.

Authority: Education Code Section 19992.

Reference: Education Code Sections 19989 and 19990.

