CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE – MATRIX ADOPTION TABLEAPPENDIX N – REPLICABLE BUILDINGS

(Not adopted by state agencies)

Adopting agency	BSC	BSC-CG	SFM	HCD	DSA	OSHPD	BSCC	DPH	AGR	DWR	CEC	CA	SL	SLC
 1	2	1/AC	AC	SS	SS/CC	1	1R	2	3	4	5
Adopt entire chapter																							
Adopt entire chapter as amended (amended sections listed below)																							
Adopt only those sections that are listed below																							
Chapter / Section																							
																							APPENDIX N REPLICABLE BUILDINGS

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unlessspecifically adopted by a state agency or referenced in the adopting ordinance.

User notes:

About this appendix: Appendix N provides jurisdictions with a means of incorporating guidelines for replicable buildings into their building code adoption process. The intent of these provisions is to give jurisdictions a means of streamlining their document review process while verifying code compliance.

Code development reminder: Code change proposals to this appendix will be considered by the IBC—Structural Code Development Committee during the 2022 (Group B) Code Development Cycle.

SECTION N101 ADMINISTRATION

N101.1 Purpose

The purpose of this appendix is to provide a format and direction regarding the implementation of a replicable building program.

N101.2 Objectives

Such programs allow a jurisdiction to recover from a natural disaster faster and allow for consistent application of the codes for replicable building projects. It will result in faster turnaround for the end user, and a quicker turnaround through the plan review process.

SECTION N102 DEFINITIONS

N102.1 Definitions

The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this appendix, have the meanings shown herein.

REPLICABLE BUILDING. A building or structure utilizing a replicable design.

REPLICABLE DESIGN. A prototypical design developed for application in multiple locations with minimal variation or modification.

SECTION N103 REPLICABLE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS

N103.1 Prototypical construction documents

A replicable design shall establish prototypical construction documents for application at multiple locations. The construction documents shall include details appropriate to each wind region, seismic design category, and climate zone for locations in which the replicable design is intended for application. Application of replicable design shall not vary with regard to the following, except for allowable variations in accordance with Section N106.

1.Use and occupancy classification.

2.Building heights and area limitations.

3.Type of construction classification.

4.Fire-resistance ratings.

5.Interior finishes.

6.Fire protection system.

7.Means of egress.

8.Accessibility.

9.Structural design criteria.

10.Energy efficiency.

11.Type of mechanical and electrical systems.

12.Type of plumbing system and number of fixtures.

SECTION N104 REPLICABLE DESIGN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

N104.1 General

A summary description of the replicable design and related construction documents shall be submitted to an approved agency. Where approval is requested for elements of the replicable design that is not within the scope of the California Building Code, the construction documents shall specifically designate the codes for which review is sought. Construction documents shall be signed, sealed and dated by a registered design professional.

N104.1.1 Architectural plans and specifications

Where approval of the architectural requirements of the replicable design is sought, the submittal documents shall include architectural plans and specifications as follows:

1.Description of uses and the proposed occupancy groups for all portions of the building.

2.Proposed type of construction of the building.

3.Fully dimensioned drawings to determine building areas and height.

4.Adequate details and dimensions to evaluate means of egress, including occupant loads for each floor, exit arrangement and sizes, corridors, doors and stairs.

5.Exit signs and means of egress lighting, including power supply.

6.Accessibility scoping provisions.

7.Description and details of proposed special occupancies such as a covered mall, high-rise, mezzanine, atrium and public garage.

8.Adequate details to evaluate fire-resistance-rated construction requirements, including data substantiating required ratings.

9.Details for plastics, insulation and safety glazing installation.

10.Details of required fire protection systems.

11.Material specifications demonstrating fire-resistance criteria.

N104.1.2 Structural plans, specifications and engineering details

Where approval of the structural requirements of the replicable design is sought, the submittal documents shall include details for each wind region, seismic design category and climate zone for which approval is sought; and shall include the following:

1.Signed and sealed structural design calculations that support the member sizes on the drawings.

2.Design load criteria, including: frost depth, live loads, snow loads, wind loads, earthquake design date, and other special loads

3.Details of foundations and superstructure.

4.Provisions for special inspections.

N104.1.3 Energy conservation details

Where approval of the energy conservation requirements of the replicable design is sought, the submittal documents shall include details for each climate zone for which approval is sought; and shall include the following:

1.Climate zones for which approval is sought.

2.Building envelope details.

3.Building mechanical system details.

4.Details of electrical power and lighting systems.

5.Provisions for system commissioning.

SECTION N105 REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF REPLICABLE DESIGN

N105.1 General

Proposed replicable designs shall be reviewed by an approved agency. The review shall be applicable only to the replicable design features submitted in accordance with Section N104. The review shall determine compliance with this code and additional codes specified in Section N104.1.

N105.2 Documentation

The results of the review shall be documented indicating compliance with the code requirements.

N105.3 Deficiencies

Where the review of the submitted construction documents identifies elements where the design is deficient and will not comply with the applicable code requirements, the approved agency shall notify the proponent of the replicable design, in writing, of the specific areas of noncompliance and request correction.

N105.4 Approval

Where the review of the submitted construction documents determines that the design is in compliance with the codes designated in Section N104.1, and where deficiencies identified in Section N105.3 have been corrected the approved agency shall issue a summary report of Approved Replicable Design. The summary report shall include any limitations on the approved replicable design including, but not limited to climate zones, wind regions and seismic design categories.

SECTION N106 SITE-SPECIFIC APPLICATION OF APPROVED REPLICABLE DESIGN

N106.1 General

Where site-specific application of a replicable design that has been approved under the provisions of Section N105 is sought, the construction documents submitted to the building official shall comply with this section.

N106.2 Submittal documents

A summary description of the replicable design and related construction document shall be submitted. Construction documents shall be signed, sealed and dated by the registered design professional. A statement, signed, sealed and dated by the registered design professional, that the replicable design submitted for local review is the same as the replicable design reviewed by the approved agency, shall be submitted.

N106.2.1 Architectural plans and specifications

Architectural plans and specifications shall include the following:

1.Construction documents for variations from the replicable design.

2.Construction for portions that are not part of the replicable design.

3.Documents for local requirements as identified by the building official.

4.Construction documents detailing the foundation system.

SECTION N107 SITE-SPECIFIC REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF REPLICABLE DESIGN

N107.1 General

Proposed site-specific application of replicable design shall be submitted to the building official in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1 and Appendix N.

N107.2 Site-specific review and approval of replicable design

The building official shall verify that the replicable design submitted for site-specific application is the same as the approved replicable design reviewed by the approved agency. In addition, the building official shall review the following for code compliance.

1.Construction documents for variations from the replicable design.

2.Construction for portions of the building that are not part of the replicable design.

3.Documents for local requirements as identified by the building official.

