CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE – MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE CHAPTER 28 – MECHANICAL SYSTEMS

(Matrix Adoption Tables are nonregulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.)

Adopting agency	BSC	BSC-CG	SFM	HCD	DSA	OSHPD	BSCC	DPH	AGR	DWR	CEC	CA	SL	SLC
1	2	1/AC	AC	SS	SS/CC	1	1R	2	3	4	5
Adopt entire chapter																							
Adopt entire chapter as amended (amended sections listed below)			X																				
Adopt only those sections that are listed below																							
Chapter / Section																							
2802			X																				
																							The state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: †

The Office of the State Fire Marshal’s adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to Section 1.11.

CHAPTER 28 MECHANICAL SYSTEMS

User note:

About this chapter: Mechanical systems are a key element of any building. Chapter 28 regulates such systems by linking to the California Mechanical Code and International Fuel Gas Code®, where details of mechanical system requirements are provided.

SECTION 2801 GENERAL

[M] [M] 2801.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter, the California Mechanical Code and the International Fuel Gas Code shall govern the design, construction, erection and installation of mechanical appliances, equipment and systems used in buildings and structures covered by this code. Masonry chimneys, fireplaces and barbecues shall comply with the California Mechanical Code and Chapter 21 of this code. The California Fire Code, the International Property Maintenance Code, the California Mechanical Code and the International Fuel Gas Code shall govern the use and maintenance of mechanical components, appliances, equipment and systems. The California Existing Building Code, the California Mechanical Code and the International Fuel Gas Code shall govern the alteration, repair, relocation, replacement and addition of mechanical components, appliances, equipment and systems.

2802 Spark Arrestor.

[SFM] All chimneys attached to any appliance or fireplace that burns solid fuel shall be equipped with an approved spark arrester. The spark arrestor shall meet all of the following requirements:

1.The net free area of the spark arrestor shall be not less than four times the net free area of the outlet of the chimney.

2.The spark arrestor screen shall have heat and corrosion resistance equivalent to 19-gage galvanized steel or 24-gage stainless steel.

3.Openings shall not permit the passage of spheres having a diameter larger than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) nor block the passage of spheres having a diameter of less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm).

4.The spark arrestor shall be accessible for cleaning and the screen or chimney cap shall be removable to allow for cleaning of the chimney flue.

