

The IFC is a model code that regulates minimum fire safety requirements for new and existing buildings, facilities, storage and processes. The IFC addresses fire prevention, fire protection, life safety and safe storage and use of hazardous materials in new and existing buildings, facilities and processes. The IFC provides a total approach of controlling hazards in all buildings and sites, regardless of the hazard being indoors or outdoors.

The IFC is a design document. For example, before one constructs a building, the site must be provided with an adequate water supply for fire-fighting operations and a means of building access for emergency responders in the event of a medical emergency, fire or natural or technological disaster. Depending on the building’s occupancy and uses, the IFC regulates the various hazards that may be housed within the building, including refrigeration systems, application of flammable finishes, fueling of motor vehicles, high-piled combustible storage, and the storage and use of hazardous materials. The IFC sets forth minimum requirements for these and other hazards and contains requirements for maintaining the life safety of building occupants; protecting emergency responders; and limiting the damage to a building and its contents as the result of a fire, explosion or unauthorized hazardous material discharge.

As described, the IFC has many types of requirements for buildings and facilities. The applicability of these requirements varies. An understanding of the applicability of requirements, as addressed in Sections 102.1 and 102.2, is necessary. Section 102.1 addresses when the construction and design provisions are applicable, whereas Section 102.2 addresses when the administrative, operational and maintenance provisions are applicable. Generally, the construction and design provisions apply to only new buildings or existing buildings and occupancies as addressed by Chapter 11. The administrative, maintenance and operational requirements are applicable to all buildings and facilities, whether new or existing.

