CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE – MATRIX ADOPTION TABLECHAPTER 5 – PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE METHOD

(Matrix Adoption Tables are nonregulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user.  See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.)

	Adopting Agency	BSC	BSC-CG	SFM	HCD	DSA	OSHPD		BSCC	DPH	AGR	DWR	CEC	CA	SL	SLC
	1	2	1/AC	AC	SS	SS/CC	1	1R	2	3	4	5
	Adopt Entire Chapter													X										
	Adopt Entire Chapter as amended (amended sections listed below)				X	X	X																	
	Adopt only those sections that are listed below	X		X					X	X		X	X		X	X								
	Chapter / Section																							
	501											X	X		X	X								
	501.1	X			X																			
	501.1 Exception 1					X																		
	501.1 Exception 2				X																			
>	501.1.1 – 501.5.1			X																				
	501.1.2	X																						
	501.3				†	†	†																	
	501.5			X	X																			
	502											X	X		X	X								
	502.1 Exception	X																						
	502.3	X																						
>	502.4	X																						
>	502.6				†	†	†																	
	503											X	X		X	X								
	503.1	X																						
	503.2	X																						
	503.3	X							X	X														
	503.14			X	†	†	†																	
>	503.15			X																				
	503.16				†	†	†																	
>	503.17			X	†	†	†																	
	504			X	†	†	†					X	X		X	X								
	505			X								X	X		X	X								
	505.2				X	X																		
	506			X								X	X		X	X								
	506.1	X																						
	506.1.1	X																						
	506.2	X																						
	506.3	X																						
	506.4 Exception	X																						
	506.6				†	†	†																	
	507				†	†	†																	The state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: †

The Office of the State Fire Marshal’s adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to Section 1.11.

CHAPTER 5 PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE METHOD

User note:

About this chapter: Chapter 5 provides details for the prescriptive compliance method—one of the three main options of compliance available in this code for buildings and structures undergoing alteration, addition or change of occupancy.

SECTION 501 GENERAL

501.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall control the alteration, addition and change of occupancy of existing buildings and structures, [BSC] including state-regulated structures in accordance with Section 501.1.2.Historic buildings and structures shall comply with Part 8, Title 24, C.C.R.

Exceptions:



1.[HCD 2] For relocated or moved buildings and maintenance, alteration, repair, addition or change of occupancy to existing buildings and accessory structures in mobilehome parks or special occupancy parks as provided in Section 1.8.2.1.3. See California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapters 2 and 2.2.

2.[HCD 1] Limited-density owner-built rural dwellings.

[HCD 1] In addition to the requirements in this chapter, maintenance, alteration, repair, addition or change of occupancy to existing buildings and accessory structures under the authority of the Department of Housing and Community Development, as provided in Section 1.8.2.1.1, shall comply with California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchapter 1.

501.1.1 Compliance with other methods.

Alterations, additions and changes of occupancy to existing buildings and structures shall comply with the provisions of this chapter or with one of the methods provided in Section 301.3.

501.1.2 Existing state-owned structures.

[BSC] The provisions of Sections 317 through 322 establish minimum standards for earthquake evaluation and design for retro-fit of existing state-owned structures, including buildings owned by the University of California, the California State University and the Judicial Council.

The provisions of Sections 317 through 322 may be adopted by a local jurisdiction for earthquake evaluation and design for retrofit of existing buildings.

501.2 Fire-resistance ratings.

Where approved by the code official, in buildings where an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 of the California Building Code has been added, and the building is now sprinklered throughout, the required fire-resistance ratings of building elements and materials shall be permitted to meet the requirements of the current building code. The building is required to meet the other applicable requirements of the California Building Code.

Plans, investigation and evaluation reports, and other data shall be submitted indicating which building elements and materials the applicant is requesting the code official to review and approve for determination of applying the current building code fire-resistance ratings. Any special construction features, including fire-resistance-rated assemblies and smoke-resistive assemblies, conditions of occupancy, means of egress conditions, fire code deficiencies, approved modifications or approved alternative materials, design and methods of construction, and equipment applying to the building that impact required fire-resistance ratings shall be identified in the evaluation reports submitted.

501.3 Health care facilities.

In Group I-2 facilities, ambulatory care facilities and outpatient clinics, any altered or added portion of an existing electrical or medical gas systems shall be required to meet installation and equipment requirements in NFPA 99.

501.4 Existing Group R occupancies.

[SFM] See the California Residential Code for existing Group R-3 occupancies or Chapter 11 of the California Fire Code for all other existing Group R occupancies.

501.5 Carbon monoxide alarms.

[HCD 1, SFM] Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17926, carbon monoxide detection shall be provided in all existing Group R buildings, as required in Section 915 of the California Building Code or Section R315 of the California Residential Code, as applicable.

501.5.1 Carbon monoxide detection in alterations to an existing Group E building.

Where the alteration adds any of the conditions identified in the California Fire Code Sections 915.1.2 through 915.1.6 to an existing Group E building, not previously required to be provided with carbon monoxide detection, new carbon monoxide detection shall be installed in accordance with Section 915 of the California Fire Code.

Exceptions:

1.The alteration replaces an existing fossil-fuel
burning appliance, fireplace or forced-air furnace, or any of the conditions identified in Sections 915.1.2 through 9151.6 are already present.

2.The Group E building was constructed before the
adoption of the 2016 California Building Standards Code.

SECTION 502 ADDITIONS

502.1 General.

[BSC & HCD] Additions to any building or structure shall comply with the requirements of the California Building Code or California Residential Code, as applicable, for new construction. Alterations to the existing building or structure shall be made to ensure that the existing building or structure together with the addition are not less complying with the provisions of the California Building Code than the existing building or structure was prior to the addition. An existing building together with its additions shall comply with the height and area provisions of Chapter 5 of the California Building Code or the height provisions of Chapter 3 of the California Residential Code, as applicable.

Exception: [BSC] For state-owned buildings, including those owned by the University of California and the California State University and the Judicial Council, the requirements of Section 502.5 are replaced by the requirements of Sections 317 through 322.

[BS] 502.2 Disproportionate earthquake damage.

A building assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F that has sustained disproportionate earthquake damage shall be subject to the requirements for buildings with substantial structural damage to vertical elements of the lateral force-resisting system.

[BS] 502.3 Flood hazard areas.

For buildings and structures in flood hazard areas established in Section 1612.3 of the California Building Code, or Section R322 of the California Residential Code, as applicable, any addition that constitutes substantial improvement of the existing structure shall comply with the flood design requirements for new construction, and all aspects of the existing structure shall be brought into compliance with the requirements for new construction for flood design.

For buildings and structures in flood hazard areas established in Section 1612.3 of the California Building Code, or Section R322 of the California Residential Code, as applicable, any additions that do not constitute substantial improvement of the existing structure are not required to comply with the flood design requirements for new construction.

[BS] 502.4 Existing structural elements carrying gravity load.

Any existing gravity load-carrying structural element for which an addition and its related alterations cause an increase in design dead, live or snow load, including snow drift effects, of more than 5 percent shall be replaced or altered as needed to carry the gravity loads required by the California Building Code for new structures. Any existing gravity load-carrying structural element whose vertical loadcarrying capacity is decreased as part of the addition and its related alterations shall be considered to be an altered element subject to the requirements of Section 503.3. Any existing element that will form part of the lateral load path for any part of the addition shall be considered to be an existing lateral load-carrying structural element subject to the requirements of Section 502.5.

Exception:  Buildings of Group R occupancy with not more than five dwelling or sleeping units used solely for residential purposes where the existing building and the addition together comply with the conventional lightframe construction methods of the California Building Code or the provisions of the California Residential Code.

[BS] 502.5 Existing structural elements carrying lateral load.

Where the addition is structurally independent of the existing structure, existing lateral load-carrying structural elements shall be permitted to remain unaltered. Where the addition is not structurally independent of the existing structure, the existing structure and its addition acting together as a single structure shall be shown to meet the requirements of Sections 1609 and 1613 of the California Building Code using full seismic forces.

Exceptions:

1.Any existing lateral load-carrying structural element whose demand-capacity ratio with the addition considered is not more than 10 percent greater than its demand-capacity ratio with the addition ignored shall be permitted to remain unaltered. For purposes of calculating demand-capacity ratios, the demand shall consider applicable load combinations with design lateral loads or forces in accordance with Sections 1609 and 1613 of the California Building Code. For purposes of this exception, comparisons of demand-capacity ratios and calculation of design lateral loads, forces and capacities shall account for the cumulative effects of additions and alterations since original construction.

2.Buildings of Group R occupancy with not more than five dwelling or sleeping units used solely for residential purposes where the existing building and the addition together comply with the conventional light-frame construction methods of the California Building Code or the provisions of the California Residential Code.



502.6 Enhanced classroom acoustics.

In Group E occupancies, enhanced classroom acoustics shall be provided in all classrooms in the addition with a volume of 20,000 cubic feet (565 m3) or less. Enhanced classroom acoustics shall comply with the reverberation time in Section 808 of ICC A117.1.





SECTION 503 ALTERATIONS

503.1 General.

Alterations to any building or structure shall comply with the requirements of the California Building Code or California Residential Code, as applicable, for new construction. Alterations shall be such that the existing building or structure is not less complying with the provisions of the California Building Code or California Residential Code, as applicable, than the existing building or structure was prior to the alteration.

Exceptions:

1.An existing stairway shall not be required to comply with the requirements of Section 1011 of the California Building Code where the existing space and construction does not allow a reduction in pitch or slope.

2.Handrails otherwise required to comply with Section 1011.11 of the California Building Code shall not be required to comply with the requirements of Section 1014.6 of the California Building Code regarding full extension of the handrails where such extensions would be hazardous because of plan configuration.

3.Where provided in below-grade transportation stations, existing and new escalators shall be permitted to have a clear width of less than 32 inches (815 mm).

4.[BSC] For state-owned buildings, including those owned by the University of California and the California State University and the judicial council, the requirements of Section 503.4 are replaced by the requirements of Sections 317 through 322.

[BS] 503.2 Flood hazard areas.

For buildings and structures in flood hazard areas established in Section 1612.3 of the California Building Code, or Section R322 of the California Residential Code, as applicable, any alteration that constitutes substantial improvement of the existing structure shall comply with the flood design requirements for new construction, and all aspects of the existing structure shall be brought into compliance with the requirements for new construction for flood design.

For buildings and structures in flood hazard areas established in Section 1612.3 of the California Building Code, or Section R322 of the California Residential Code, as applicable, any alterations that do not constitute substantial improvement of the existing structure are not required to comply with the flood design requirements for new construction.

[BS] 503.3 Existing structural elements carrying gravity load.

Any existing gravity load-carrying structural element for which an alteration causes an increase in design dead, live or snow load, including snow drift effects, of more than 5 percent shall be replaced or altered as needed to carry the gravity loads required by the California Building Code for new structures. Any existing gravity load-carrying structural element whose gravity load-carrying capacity is decreased as part of the alteration shall be shown to have the capacity to resist the applicable design dead, live and snow loads including snow drift effects required by the California Building Code for new structures.

Exceptions:

1.Buildings of Group R occupancy with not more than five dwelling or sleeping units used solely for residential purposes where the altered building complies with the conventional light-frame construction methods of the California Building Code or the provisions of the California Residential Code.

2.Buildings in which the increased dead load is due entirely to the addition of a second layer of roof covering weighing 3 pounds per square foot (0.1437 kN/m2) or less over an existing single layer of roof covering [DSA-SS, DSA-SS/CC] Exception 2 is not permitted.

[BS] 503.4 Existing structural elements carrying lateral load.

Except as permitted by Section 503.13, where the alteration increases design lateral loads, results in a prohibited structural irregularity as defined in ASCE 7, or decreases the capacity of any existing lateral load-carrying structural element, the structure of the altered building or structure shall meet the requirements of Sections 1609 and 1613 of the California Building Code. Reduced seismic forces shall be permitted.

Exceptions:

1.Any existing lateral load-carrying structural element whose demand-capacity ratio with the alteration considered is not more than 10 percent greater than its demand-capacity ratio with the alteration ignored shall be permitted to remain unaltered. For purposes of calculating demand-capacity ratios, the demand shall consider applicable load combinations with design lateral loads or forces in accordance with Sections 1609 and 1613 of the California Building Code. Reduced seismic forces shall be permitted. For purposes of this exception, comparisons of demand-capacity ratios and calculation of design lateral loads, forces and capacities shall account for the cumulative effects of additions and alterations since original construction.

2.Buildings in which the increase in the demandcapacity ratio is due entirely to the addition of rooftop-supported mechanical equipment individually having an operating weight less than 400 pounds (181.4 kg) and where the total additional weight of all rooftop equipment placed after initial construction of the building is less than 10 percent of the roof dead load. For purposes of this exception, “roof” shall mean the roof level above a particular story.

[BS] 503.5 Seismic Design Category F.

Where the work area exceeds 50 percent of the building area, and where the building is assigned to Seismic Design Category F, the structure of the altered building shall meet the requirements of Sections 1609 and 1613 of the California Building Code. Reduced seismic forces shall be permitted.

[BS] 503.6 Bracing for unreinforced masonry parapets on reroofing.

Where the intended alteration requires a permit for reroofing and involves removal of roofing materials from more than 25 percent of the roof area of a building assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F that has parapets constructed of unreinforced masonry, the work shall include installation of parapet bracing to resist out-of-plane seismic forces, unless an evaluation demonstrates compliance of such items. Reduced seismic forces shall be permitted.

[BS] 503.7 Anchorage for concrete and reinforced masonry walls.

Where the work area exceeds 50 percent of the building area, the building is assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F and the building’s structural system includes concrete or reinforced masonry walls with a flexible roof diaphragm, the alteration work shall include installation of wall anchors at the roof line, unless an evaluation demonstrates compliance of existing wall anchorage. Use of reduced seismic forces shall be permitted.

[BS] 503.8 Anchorage for unreinforced masonry walls in major alterations.

Where the work area exceeds 50 percent of the building area, the building is assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F and the building’s structural system includes unreinforced masonry bearing walls, the alteration work shall include installation of wall anchors at the floor and roof lines, unless an evaluation demonstrates compliance of existing wall anchorage. Reduced seismic forces shall be permitted.

[BS] 503.9 Bracing for unreinforced masonry parapets in major alterations.

Where the work area exceeds 50 percent of the building area, and where the building is assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F, parapets constructed of unreinforced masonry shall have bracing installed as needed to resist out-of-plane seismic forces, unless an evaluation demonstrates compliance of such items. Reduced seismic forces shall be permitted.

[BS] 503.10 Anchorage of unreinforced masonry partitions in major alterations.

Where the work area exceeds 50 percent of the building area, and where the building is assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F, unreinforced masonry partitions and nonstructural walls within the work area and adjacent to egress paths from the work area shall be anchored, removed or altered to resist out-of-plane seismic forces, unless an evaluation demonstrates compliance of such items. Use of reduced seismic forces shall be permitted.

[BS] 503.11 Substantial structural alteration.

Where the work area exceeds 50 percent of the building area and where work involves a substantial structural alteration, the lateral load-resisting system of the altered building shall satisfy the requirements of Sections 1609 and 1613 of the California Building Code. Reduced seismic forces shall be permitted.

Exceptions:

1.Buildings of Group R occupancy with not more than five dwelling or sleeping units used solely for residential purposes that are altered based on the conventional light-frame construction methods of the California Building Code or in compliance with the provisions of the California Residential Code.

2.Where the intended alteration involves only the lowest story of a building, only the lateral load-resisting components in and below that story need comply with this section.

[BS] 503.12 Roof diaphragms resisting wind loads in high-wind regions.

Where the intended alteration requires a permit for reroofing and involves removal of roofing materials from more than 50 percent of the roof diaphragm of a building or section of a building located where the ultimate design wind speed is greater than 130 mph (58 m/s) in accordance with Figure 1609.3(1) of the California Building Code, roof diaphragms, connections of the roof diaphragm to roof framing members, and roof-to-wall connections shall be evaluated for the wind loads specified in Section 1609 of the California Building Code, including wind uplift. If the diaphragms and connections in their current condition are not capable of resisting 75 percent of those wind loads, they shall be replaced or strengthened in California with the loads specified in Section 1609 of the California Building Code.

Exception: Buildings that have been demonstrated to comply with the wind load provisions in ASCE 7-88 or later editions.

[BS] 503.13 Voluntary lateral force-resisting system alterations.

Structural alterations that are intended exclusively to improve the lateral force-resisting system and are not required by other sections of this code shall not be required to meet the requirements of Section 1609 or 1613 of the California Building Code, provided that all of the following apply:

1.The capacity of existing structural systems to resist forces is not reduced.

2.New structural elements are detailed and connected to existing or new structural elements as required by the California Building Code for new construction.

3.New or relocated nonstructural elements are detailed and connected to existing or new structural elements as required by the California Building Code for new construction.

4.The alterations do not create a structural irregularity as defined in ASCE 7 or make an existing structural irregularity more severe.



503.14 Smoke compartments.

In Group I-2 occupancies where the alteration is on a story used for sleeping rooms for more than 30 care recipients, the story shall be divided into not less than two compartments by smoke barrier walls in accordance with Section 407.5 of the California Building Code as required for new construction.



503.15 Refuge areas.

Where alterations affect the configuration of an area utilized as a refuge area, the capacity of the refuge area shall not be reduced below the required capacity of the refuge area for horizontal exits in accordance with Section 1026.4 of the California Building Code.

Where the horizontal exit also forms a smoke compartment, the capacity of the refuge area for Group I-1, I-2 and I- 3 occupancies and Group B ambulatory care facilities shall not be reduced below that required in Sections 407.5.3, 408.6.2, 420.6.1 and 422.3.2 of the California Building Code, as applicable.



503.16 Enhanced classroom acoustics.

In Group E occupancies, where the work area exceeds 50 percent of the building area, enhanced classroom acoustics shall be provided in all classrooms with a volume of 20,000 cubic feet (565 m3) or less. Enhanced classroom acoustics shall comply with the reverberation time in Section 808 of ICC A117.1.

503.17 Locking arrangements in educational occupancies.

In Group E occupancies, Group B educational occupancies and Group I-4 occupancies, egress doors with locking arrangements designed to keep intruders from entering the room shall comply with Section 1010.2.8 of the California Building Code.

503.18 Two-way communications systems.

Where the work area for alterations exceeds 50 percent of the building area and the building has elevator service, a two-way communication systems shall be provided where required by Section 1009.8 of the California Building Code.

SECTION 504 FIRE ESCAPES(NOT ADOPTED BY HCD) (NOT ADOPTED BY HCD)

[BE] 504.1 Where permitted.

Fire escapes shall be permitted only as provided for in Sections 504.1.1 through 504.1.4.

[BE] 504.1.1 New buildings.

Fire escapes shall not constitute any part of the required means of egress in new buildings.

[BE] 504.1.2 Existing fire escapes.

Existing fire escapes shall continue to be accepted as a component in the means of egress in existing buildings only.

[BE] 504.1.3 New fire escapes.

New fire escapes for existing buildings shall be permitted only where exterior stairways cannot be utilized because of lot lines limiting stairway size or because of sidewalks, alleys or roads at grade level. New fire escapes shall not incorporate ladders or access by windows.

[BE] 504.1.4 Limitations.

Fire escapes shall comply with this section and shall not constitute more than 50 percent of the required number of exits nor more than 50 percent of the required exit capacity.

[BE] 504.2 Location.

Where located on the front of the building and where projecting beyond the building line, the lowest landing shall be not less than 7 feet (2134 mm) or more than 12 feet (3658 mm) above grade, and shall be equipped with a counterbalanced stairway to the street. In alleyways and thoroughfares less than 30 feet (9144 mm) wide, the clearance under the lowest landing shall be not less than 12 feet (3658 mm).

[BE] 504.3 Construction.

The fire escape shall be designed to support a live load of 100 pounds per square foot (4788 Pa) and shall be constructed of steel or other approved noncombustible materials. Fire escapes constructed of wood not less than nominal 2 inches (51 mm) thick are permitted on buildings of Type V construction. Walkways and railings located over or supported by combustible roofs in buildings of Type III and IV construction are permitted to be of wood not less than nominal 2 inches (51 mm) thick.

[BE] 504.4 Dimensions.

Stairways shall be not less than 22 inches (559 mm) wide with risers not more than, and treads not less than, 8 inches (203 mm) and landings at the foot of stairways not less than 40 inches (1016 mm) wide by 36 inches (914 mm) long, located not more than 8 inches (203 mm) below the door.

[BE] 504.5 Opening protectives.

Doors and windows within 10 feet (3048 mm) of fire escape stairways shall be protected with 3/4-hour opening protectives.

Exception: Opening protection shall not be required in buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system.

SECTION 505 WINDOWS AND EMERGENCY ESCAPE OPENINGS

505.1 Replacement windows.

The installation or replacement of windows shall be as required for new installations.

505.2 Window opening control devices on replacement windows.

In Group R-1, R-2 or R-3 buildings containing dwelling or sleeping units, and one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses regulated by the California Residential Code, window opening control devices or fall prevention
devices complying with ASTM F2090 shall be installed where an existing window is replaced and where all of the following apply to the replacement window:

1.The window is operable.

2.One of the following applies:

2.1The window replacement includes replacement of the sash and frame.

2.2The window replacement includes the sash only where the existing frame remains.

3.One of the following applies:

3.1.In Group R-2 or R-3 buildings containing dwelling or sleeping units, the bottom of the clear opening of the window opening is at a height less than 36 inches (915 mm) above the finished floor.

3.2.In one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses regulated by the California Residential Code, the bottom of the clear opening of the window opening is at a height less than 24 inches (610 mm) above the finished floor.

4.The window will permit openings that will allow passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere when the window is in its largest opened position.

5.The vertical distance from the bottom of the clear opening of the window opening to the finished grade or other surface below, on the exterior of the building, is greater than 72 inches (1829 mm).

Exception: Operable windows where the bottom of the clear opening of the window opening is located more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above the finished grade or other surface below, on the exterior of the room, space or building, and that are provided with window fall prevention devices that comply with ASTM F2006.



505.3 Replacement window emergency escape and rescue openings.

Where windows are required to provide emergency escape and rescue openings in Group R-2 and R-3 occupancies and one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses regulated by the California Residential Code, replacement windows shall be exempt from the requirements of Section 1031.3 of the California Building Code and Section R310.2 of the California Residential Code, provided that the replacement window meets the following conditions:

1.The replacement window is the manufacturer’s largest standard size window that will fit within the existing frame or existing rough opening. The replacement window shall be permitted to be of the same operating style as the existing window or a style that provides for an equal or greater window opening area than the existing window.

2.Where the replacement of the window is part of a change of occupancy, it shall comply with Section 1011.5.6.

505.3.1 Control devices.

Window opening control devices or fall prevention devices complying with ASTM F2090 shall be permitted for use on windows required to provide emergency escape and rescue openings. After operation to release the control device allowing the window to fully open, the control device shall not reduce the net clear opening area of the window unit. Emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools.

505.4 Bars, grilles, covers or screens.

Bars, grilles, covers, screens or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings, bulkhead enclosure or window wells that serve such openings, provided all of the following conditions are met:

1.The minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction.

2.Such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening.

3.Where such devices are installed, they shall not reduce the net clear opening of the emergency escape and rescue openings.

4.Smoke alarms shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.2.10 of the California Building Code.

SECTION 506 CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY

506.1 Compliance.

A change of occupancy shall not be made in any building unless that building is made to comply with the requirements of the California Building Code for the use or occupancy. Changes of occupancy in a building or portion thereof shall be such that the existing building is not less complying with the provisions of this code than the existing building or structure was prior to the change. Subject to the approval of the code official, changes of occupancy shall be permitted without complying with all of the requirements of this code for the new occupancy, provided that the new occupancy is less hazardous, based on life and fire risk, than the existing occupancy.

Exception:  The building need not be made to comply with Chapter 16 of the California Building Code unless required by Section 506.5.

506.1.1 Change in the character of use.

A change of occupancy with no change of occupancy classification shall not be made to any structure that will subject the structure to any special provisions of the applicable California Codes, without approval of the code official. Compliance shall be only as necessary to meet the specific provisions and is not intended to require the entire building be brought into compliance.

506.1.2 Change in function.

[OSHPD 1R, 2, 4 and 5] A change in function shall require compliance with all the functional requirements for new construction in the California Building Code, including requirements in Sections 1224, 1225, 1226, 1227 and 1228.

Exception [OSHPD 1R]: Hospital buildings removed from acute care service adapted for re-use as skilled nursing facilities, acute psychiatric hospitals or outpatient services of a hospital may be permitted to meet the minimum room clearances, areas and dimensions of the 2001 California Building Code for existing rooms re-used for a similar purpose, subject to the approval of OSHPD.

506.2 Certificate of occupancy.

A certificate of occupancy shall be issued where it has been determined that the requirements for the new occupancy classification have been met.

506.3 Stairways.

An existing stairway shall not be required to comply with the requirements of Section 1011 of the California Building Code where the existing space and construction does not allow a reduction in pitch or slope.

506.4 Existing emergency escape and rescue openings.

Where a change of occupancy would require an emergency escape and rescue opening in accordance with Section 1031.1 of the California Building Code, operable windows serving as the emergency escape and rescue opening shall comply with the following

1.An existing operable window shall provide a minimum net clear opening of 4 square feet (0.38 m2) with a minimum net clear opening height of 22 inches (559 mm) and a minimum net clear opening width of 20 inches (508 mm).

2.A replacement window where such window complies with both of the following:

2.1.The replacement window meets the size requirements in Item 1.

2.2.The replacement window is the manufacturer’s largest standard size window that will fit within the existing frame or existing rough opening. The replacement window shall be permitted to be of the same operating style as the existing window or a style that provides for an equal or greater window opening area than the existing window.

506.5 Structural.

Any building undergoing a change of occupancy shall satisfy the requirements of this section.

Exception:  [BSC] For state-owned buildings, including those owned by the University of California and the California State University and the Judicial Council, the performance level requirements of Section 506.5 are replaced with the performance level requirements of Section 317.5.

506.5.1 Live loads.

Structural elements carrying tributary live loads from an area with a change of occupancy shall satisfy the requirements of Section 1607 of the California Building Code. Design live loads for areas of new occupancy shall be based on Section 1607 of the California Building Code. Design live loads for other areas shall be permitted to use previously approved design live loads.

Exception:  Structural elements whose demand-capacity ratio considering the change of occupancy is not more than 5 percent greater than the demand-capacity ratio based on previously approved live loads need not comply with this section.

506.5.2 Snow and wind loads.

Where a change of occupancy results in a structure being assigned to a higher risk category, the structure shall satisfy the requirements of Sections 1608 and 1609 of the California Building Code for the new risk category.

Exception:  Where the area of the new occupancy is less than 10 percent of the building area, compliance with this section is not required. The cumulative effect of occupancy changes over time shall be considered.

506.5.3 Seismic loads (seismic force-resisting system).

Where a change of occupancy results in a building being assigned to a higher risk category, or where the change is from a Group S or Group U occupancy to any occupancy other than Group S or Group U, the building shall satisfy the requirements of Section 1613 of the California Building Code for the new risk category using full seismic forces.

Exceptions:

1.Where the area of the new occupancy is less than 10 percent of the building area, the occupancy is not changing from a Group S or Group U occupancy, and the new occupancy is not assigned to Risk Category IV, compliance with this section is not required. The cumulative effect of occupancy changes over time shall be considered.

2.Where a change of use results in a building being reclassified from Risk Category I or II to Risk Category III and the seismic coefficient, SDS, is less than 0.33, compliance with this section is not required.

3.Unreinforced masonry bearing wall buildings assigned to Risk Category III and to Seismic Design Category A or B, shall be permitted to use Appendix Chapter A1 of this code.

4.Where the change is from a Group S or Group U occupancy and there is no change of risk category, use of reduced seismic forces shall be permitted.

506.5.4 Access to Risk Category IV.

Any structure that provides operational access to an adjacent structure assigned to Risk Category IV as the result of a change of occupancy shall itself satisfy the requirements of Sections 1608, 1609 and 1613 of the California Building Code. For compliance with Section 1613, California Building Code level seismic forces shall be used. Where operational access to the Risk Category IV structure is less than 10 feet (3048 mm) from either an interior lot line or from another structure, access protection from potential falling debris shall be provided.

506.6 Enhanced classroom acoustics.

In Group E occupancies, where the work area exceeds 50 percent of the building area, enhanced classroom acoustics shall be provided in all classrooms with a volume of 20,000 cubic feet (565 m3) or less. Enhanced classroom acoustics shall comply with the reverberation time in Section 808 of ICC A117.1.

SECTION 507 HISTORIC BUILDINGS (NOT ADOPTED BY HCD)

507.1 Historic buildings.

The provisions of this code that require improvements relative to a building’s existing condition or, in the case of repairs, that require improvements relative to a building’s predamage condition, shall not be mandatory for historic buildings unless specifically required by this section.

507.2 Life safety hazards.

The provisions of this code shall apply to historic buildings judged by the code official to constitute a distinct life safety hazard.

[BS] 507.3 Flood hazard areas.

Within flood hazard areas established in accordance with Section 1612.3 of the California Building Code, or Section R322 of the California Residential Code, as applicable, where the work proposed constitutes substantial improvement, the building shall be brought into compliance with Section 1612 of the California Building Code, or Section R322 of the California Residential Code, as applicable.

Exception: Historic buildings meeting any of the following criteria need not be brought into compliance:

1.Listed or preliminarily determined to be eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places.

2. Determined by the Secretary of the US Department of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined to qualify as an historic district.

3.Designated as historic under a state or local historic preservation program that is approved by the Department of Interior.

[BS] 507.4 Structural.

Historic buildings shall comply with the applicable structural provisions in this chapter.

Exceptions:

1.The code official shall be authorized to accept existing floors and existing live loads and to approve operational controls that limit the live load on any floor.

2.Repair of substantial structural damage is not required to comply with Sections 405.2.3, and 405.2.4. Substantial structural damage shall be repaired in accordance with Section 405.2.1.

