CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE – MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE CHAPTER 14 – RELOCATED OR MOVED BUILDINGS

(Matrix Adoption Tables are nonregulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.)

Adopting Agency	BSC	BSC-CG	SFM	HCD	DSA	OSHPD		BSCC	DPH	AGR	DWR	CEC	CA	SL	SLC
1	2	1/AC	AC	SS	SS/CC	1	1R	2	3	4	5
Adopt Entire Chapter																							
Adopt Entire Chapter as amended (amended sections listed below)				X	X	X																	
Adopt only those sections that are listed below																							
Chapter / Section																							
1401				X	X																		
1401.1				X	X																		
1401.2				X	X																		
																							CHAPTER 14 RELOCATED OR MOVED BUILDINGS

User note:

About this chapter: Chapter 14 is applicable to any building that is moved or relocated. The relocation of a building will automatically cause an inspection and evaluation process that enables the jurisdiction to determine the level of compliance with the California Fire Code and the California Existing Building Code. These two codes, by their scope, are applicable to existing buildings. This is the case regardless of any repair, remodeling, alteration work or change of occupancy occurring (see the California Fire Code and California Existing Building Code).

SECTION 1401 GENERAL

1401.1 Scope

This chapter provides requirements for relocated or moved structures, including relocatable buildings as defined in Chapter 2. [HCD] The provisions of Chapter 14 are not applicable to commercial modulars, manufactured homes, mobilehomes, multi-unit manufactured housing and special purpose commercial modulars as defined in Health and Safety Code Sections 18001.8, 18007, 18008, 18008.7 and 18012.5, respectively. These structures are subject to installation/reinstallation requirements specified in the Mobilehome Parks Act (Health and Safety Code Section 18200 et seq.) and the California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2. Manufactured homes must meet unit identification (data plate) and certification label requirements as specified in the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 24, Subtitle B, Chapter XX, Part 3280 and Health and Safety Code Section 18032. Commercial modulars and special purpose commercial modulars must meet identification requirements in the California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 3, Subchapter 2.

1401.1.1 Bleachers, grandstands and folding and telescopic seating.

Relocated or moved bleachers, grandstands and folding and telescopic seating shall comply with ICC 300.

1401.2 Conformance.

The building shall be safe for human occupancy as determined by the California Fire Code and the International Property Maintenance Code. Any repair, alteration or change of occupancy undertaken within the moved structure shall comply with the requirements of this code applicable to the work being performed. Any field-fabricated elements shall comply with the requirements of the California Building Code or the California Residential Code, as applicable. [HCD 1 & HCD 2] After July 1, 1978, local ordinances or regulations for relocated or moved apartment houses and dwellings shall permit the retention of existing materials and methods of construction, provided the apartment house or dwelling complies with the building standards for foundations applicable to new construction and does not become or continue to be a substandard building. For additional information, see Health and Safety Code Section 17958.9.

SECTION 1402 REQUIREMENTS

1402.1 Location on the lot.

The building shall be located on the lot in accordance with the requirements of the California Building Code or the California Residential Code, as applicable.

[BS] 1402.2 Foundation.

The foundation system of relocated buildings shall comply with the California Building Code or the California Residential Code, as applicable.

[BS] 1402.2.1 Connection to the foundation.

The connection of the relocated building to the foundation shall comply with the California Building Code or the California Residential Code, as applicable.

[BS] 1402.3 Wind loads.

Buildings shall comply with California Building Code or California Residential Code wind provisions, as applicable.

Exceptions:

1.Detached one- and two-family dwellings and Group U occupancies where wind loads at the new location are not higher than those at the previous location.

2.Structural elements whose stress is not increased by more than 10 percent.

[BS] 1402.4 Seismic loads.

Buildings shall comply with California Building Code or California Residential Code seismic provisions at the new location, as applicable.

Exceptions:

1.Structures in Seismic Design Categories A and B and detached one- and two-family dwellings in Seismic Design Categories A, B and C where the seismic loads at the new location are not higher than those at the previous location.

2.Structural elements whose stress is not increased by more than 10 percent.

[BS] 1402.5 Snow loads.

Structures shall comply with California Building Code or California Residential Code snow loads, as applicable, where snow loads at the new location are higher than those at the previous location.

Exception: Structural elements whose stress is not increased by more than 5 percent.

[BS] 1402.6 Flood hazard areas.

If relocated or moved into a flood hazard area, structures shall comply with Section 1612 of the California Building Code, or Section R322 of the California Residential Code, as applicable.

[BS] 1402.7 Required inspection and repairs.

The code official shall be authorized to inspect, or to require approved professionals to inspect at the expense of the owner, the various structural parts of a relocated building to verify that structural components and connections have not sustained structural damage. Any repairs required by the code official as a result of such inspection shall be made prior to the final approval.

