CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE – MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE APPENDIX AY – AREAS PROTECTED BY THE FACILITIES OF THE CENTRAL VALLEY FLOOD PROTECTION PLAN

(Matrix Adoption Tables are nonregulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.)

	Adopting agency	BSC	BSC-CG	SFM	HCD	DSA	OSHPD	BSCC	DPH	AGR	DWR	CEC	CA	SL	SLC
1	2	1/AC	AC	SS	SS/CC	1	1R	2	3	4	5
>	Adopt entire chapter																			X				
	Adopt entire chapter as amended (amended sections listed below)																							
	Adopt only those sections that are listed below																							
	Chapter / Section																							
																								

APPENDIX AY AREAS PROTECTED BY THE FACILITIES OF THE CENTRAL VALLEY FLOOD PROTECTION PLAN

Note: The effective date of these standards shall be March 1, 2012 or ninety (90) days after the corresponding maps are completed and readily available to the general public, whichever is the later date.

Table W301.2(1) Revise as follows:

Replace the Flood Hazards cell in table as follows:

FLOOD HAZARDS
NFIPg	CVFPPj
	

j. Jurisdictions with Areas Protected by the Facilities of the Central Valley where Flood Levels are Anticipated to Exceed Three Feet for the 200-Year Flood Event, as defined in Section AY102, shall fill in this part of the table with “Yes” or “No”.

AY101 AY101 General. General.

The provisions of this section shall apply to new construction, changes of use or repair and to substantial improvement and restoration of substantial damage of buildings in areas protected by the facilities of the Central Valley Flood Protection Plan, as established in Table R301.2, where flood levels are anticipated to exceed three feet for the 200-year flood event. Except as specifically required by this section, buildings and structures shall meet applicable provisions of this code.

AY101.1 AY101.1 Construction documents. Construction documents.

Construction documents shall include the WSEL200 and the elevation(s) of the floor(s) and, as applicable, the elevation(s) and slopes of roofs, of the building or structure.

AY102 AY102 Definitions. Definitions.

The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this section, have the meanings shown.

AREAS PROTECTED BY THE FACILITIES OF THE CENTRAL VALLEY FLOOD PROTECTION PLAN WHERE FLOOD LEVELS ARE ANTICIPATED TO EXCEED THREE FEET FOR THE 200-YEAR FLOOD EVENT. Geographical areas identified by the state as “Areas Protected by the Facilities of the Central Valley Flood Protection Plan where Flood Levels are Anticipated to Exceed Three Feet for the 200-Year Flood Event” in accordance with the Health and Safety Code Section 50465. Published data from the California Department of Water Resources can be obtained online at the following website: www.water.ca.gov/BuildingCodes.

Note: The facilities of the Central Valley Flood Protection Plan are identified in the following counties: Butte, Colusa, Fresno, Glenn, Lake, Madera, Merced, Plumas, Sacramento, San Joaquin, Solano, Stanislaus, Sutter, Tehama, Yolo and Yuba. Determination of additional facilities is ongoing.

CENTRAL VALLEY. Any lands in the bed or along or near the banks of the Sacramento River and the San Joaquin River, and any of their tributaries or connected therewith, or upon any land adjacent thereto, or within any of the overflow basins thereof, or upon any land susceptible to overflow therefrom. The following counties and the incorporated municipalities within these counties, in whole or in part, are in the Central Valley: Alpine, Amador, Butte, Calaveras, Colusa, El Dorado, Fresno, Glenn, Lake, Lassen, Madera, Mariposa, Merced, Modoc, Napa, Nevada, Placer, Plumas, Sacramento, San Benito, San Joaquin, Shasta, Sierra, Siskiyou, Solano, Stanislaus, Sutter, Tehama, Tuolumne, Yolo and Yuba. A map that delineates the Central Valley can be obtained online at the following website: www.water.ca.gov/BuildingCodes.

EVACUATION LOCATION. A location no less than one (1) foot (0.30 meter) above the WSEL200 where occupants are expected to congregate pending evacuation and from which occupants may be evacuated during conditions of flooding, such as a space within the building that has an exit door or operable window; a deck, balcony, porch, rooftop platform or rooftop area; or combinations thereof.

FACILITIES OF THE CENTRAL VALLEY FLOOD PROTECTION PLAN. The facilities referenced herein include the facilities of State Plan of Flood Control and other flood management facilities in the Central Valley evaluated under the Central Valley Flood Protection Plan, which will be completed in 2012 and updated every 5 years thereafter. The facilities of State Plan of Flood Control include the state and federal flood control works (levees, weirs, channels and other features) of the Sacramento River Flood Control Project described in Water Code Section 8350, and flood control projects in the Sacramento River and San Joaquin River watersheds authorized pursuant to Article 2 (commencing with Water Code section 12648) of Chapter 2 of Part 6 of Division 6 for which the Central Valley Flood Protection Board or the Department of Water Resources has provided the assurances of nonfederal cooperation to the United States, and those facilities identified in Water Code Section 8361.

ROUTE TO THE EVACUATION LOCATION. The path through and along which occupants move from the habitable areas of a building or structure that are below the WSEL200 to the evacuation location.

SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has sustained damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

1.Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building official and that area the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.

2.Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.

WSEL200. The water surface elevation (WSEL) of the 200-year flood event that is identified by the state when it identifies areas that receive protection from the facilities of the Central Valley Flood Protection Plan.

AY103 AY103 Structural stability. Structural stability.

Portions of buildings and structures that support evacuation locations shall be designed, constructed, connected and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or permanent lateral movement resulting from the hydrostatic loads anticipated during conditions of flooding anticipated for the 200-year flood event.

Exception: When one flood vent (minimum) is provided on two opposite sides of the building or structure that comply with Figure AY103.

AY103.1 AY103.1 Determination of loads. Determination of loads.

Hydrostatic loads, based on the depth of water determined by the WSEL200 shall be determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of ASCE 7. Reduction of hydrostatic loads may be accomplished by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters to minimize unbalanced loads. Such means shall be designed by a registered design professional and include, but are not limited to, openings, valves and panels designed to yield under load.

AY104 AY104 Evacuation Locations. Evacuation Locations.

An evacuation location and a route to the evacuation location shall be provided.

AY104.1 AY104.1 Route to evacuation location. Route to evacuation location.

A route shall be allowed through any number of intervening rooms or spaces. Doors along the route shall be openable without the use of a key, lock, special knowledge or effort.

AY104.2 AY104.2 minimum size requirements. minimum size requirements.

Evacuation locations shall provide a minimum gross floor area of 7 square feet (0.65 m2) per occupant, based on the occupant load of the portions of the building that are below WSEL200. The area provided shall be adequate to accommodate the occupant load of the upper levels as well as the anticipated occupant load from the area below the WSEL200.

AY105 AY105 Space within the building. Space within the building.

If the evacuation location is a space within a building, the evacuation location shall be provided with a means for occupants to be evacuated out of the building specified in Section AY105.1, AY105.2 or AY105.3. The means for occupants to be evacuated out of the building shall address the mobility of the occupants.

AY105.1 AY105.1 Windows, minimum size and dimensions. Windows, minimum size and dimensions.

A minimum of one window shall be provided that meet the minimum size, minimum dimensions and operational constraints of Section R310. The number of such windows shall be appropriate for the occupancy or occupancies of the portions of the building that are below WSEL200.

Note: It is the intent of this section that windows be of sufficient number, sizes and dimensions to reasonably accommodate the needs and limitations of the occupants of the building. Reasonable judgment in the application of this requirement must be exercised by the building official.

AY105.2 AY105.2 Exterior doors to decks, balconies and porches. Exterior doors to decks, balconies and porches.

Exterior doors to decks, balconies and porches shall be sized in accordance with Section R311.

AY105.3 AY105.3 Means of escape to rooftops from spaces within a building. Means of escape to rooftops from spaces within a building.

The means of escape to rooftops shall be permitted to be provided by a stairway, ramp, alternating tread device, fixed ladder or other means approved by the building official.

AY106 AY106 Decks and balconies that are evacuation locations. Decks and balconies that are evacuation locations.

Decks and balconies that have finish floors no less than one (1) foot (0.30 meter) above the WSEL200 shall be permitted to be evacuation locations. When a deck or balcony used as an evacuation location is not at the same level as a floor within the building, it shall be permitted to be accessed by a stairway, ramp, alternating tread device, fixed ladder or other means approved by the building official.

AY106.1 AY106.1 Live load. Live load.

Decks and balconies that are evacuation locations shall be designed for the live load required in Table R301.5.

AY106.2 AY106.2 Evacuation route. Evacuation route.

Evacuation routes to decks and balconies that are evacuation locations shall be permitted to be provided by a stairway, ramp, alternating tread device, fixed ladder or other means approved by the building official.

AY107 AY107 Rooftop evacuation locations. Rooftop evacuation locations.

Rooftop evacuation locations shall be permitted to include rooftop platforms and rooftop areas provided that they are no less than one (1) foot (0.30 meter) above the WSEL200. A minimum horizontal distance of 3 feet (0.91 meter) shall be provided between the lower edge of the rooftop evacuation location access point and the evacuation location lower perimeter.

AY107.1 AY107.1 Rooftop platforms required. Rooftop platforms required.

A rooftop platform shall be provided if the roof covering materials are:

1.Clay tile, concrete tile, slate shingles, wood shingles or wood shakes and the roof slope is three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25 percent slope) or greater.

2.Metal roof panels or metal roof shingles and the roof slope is one unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (8.33 percent slope) or greater.

AY107.2 AY107.2 Roof live loads. Roof live loads.

Roof areas that are rooftop evacuation locations and roofs that support rooftop platforms that are evacuation locations shall be designed for the roof live load required for the occupancy as required in CBC Table 1607.2.

AY107.3 AY107.3 Evacuation routes to rooftop evacuation locations. Evacuation routes to rooftop evacuation locations.

Evacuation routes to rooftop evacuation locations shall be permitted to be provided by a stairway, ramp, alternating tread device, fixed ladder or other means approved by the building official.

AY107.4 AY107.4 Perimeter protection. Perimeter protection.

The perimeter of rooftop evacuation locations shall be protected by:

1.Guards per Section R312 if a rooftop platform is provided; or

2.A railing that is 12 inches (305 mm) in height if a sloped roof is provided.

AY107.5 AY107.5 Utility/equipment buffer zone. Utility/equipment buffer zone.

A separation of 48 inches shall be provided between an evacuation location and any mechanical equipment, photovoltaic system, utility service drop or other utility line. Electrical service lines shall not pass over evacuation locations.

AY108 AY108 Attics that are evacuation locations. Attics that are evacuation locations.

Attics that have finish floors no less than one (1) foot above the WSEL200 shall be permitted to be evacuation locations.

AY108.1 AY108.1 Headroom. Headroom.

When an attic is used as an evacuation location, the minimum headroom of the required area shall be 30 inches (762 mm) with 50 percent of the required area having a headroom of 60 inches (1524 mm).

AY108.2 AY108.2 Attic flooring. Attic flooring.

The required area of the evacuation location shall be solidly sheathed.

AY108.3 AY108.3 Attic live loads. Attic live loads.

Attic areas that are used as evacuation locations shall be designed for the attic with limited live load requirement in Table R301.5.

AY108.4 AY108.4 Evacuation routes to attic evacuation locations. Evacuation routes to attic evacuation locations.

In Group R-3.1 occupancies that are subject to the requirements of Chapter 11A or 11B, such requirements shall apply to the evacuation routes to attics. In Group R-3 occupancies, evacuation routes to attic evacuation locations shall be permitted to be provided by a stairway, ramp, alternating tread device, fixed ladder or other means approved by the building official.

AY108.5 AY108.5 Means of escape from attics. Means of escape from attics.

The means of escape from attics shall comply with Section AY105.

AY109 AY109 Alternate means of protection.

AY109.1 AY109.1 Request for approval of alternate means of protection.

Requests for approval to use an alternative means of protection shall be made in writing to the building official by the owner or the owner’s authorized representative. The request shall be accompanied by a full statement of the conditions and sufficient evidence that the proposed alternate means of protection provides reasonable protection to occupants. The building official shall require the owner to obtain a written statement from the applicable emergency management authority regarding plans and processes related to notification of anticipated conditions of flooding, warnings, evacuations and other pertinent conditions relative to the proximity of nearby levees. The building official shall also require the owner to obtain a written statement and findings from the entity that has jurisdiction over the management, maintenance, monitoring and control of flood protection works in the vicinity of the location of the owner’s property, such statement shall comment on the viability of the proposed alternate means of protection. The building official may request written statements from the Central Valley Flood Protection Board, the California Department of Water Resources and the California Emergency Management Agency.

Approval of a request for use of an alternative means of protection made pursuant to these provisions shall be limited to the particular case covered by the request and shall not be construed as establishing any precedent for any future request except in substantially equivalent situations.

Note: Contact information for the California Department of Water Resources and the Department’s Directory of Flood Officials, which includes levee and reclamation district boundary maps, is available online at the following website: www.water.ca.gov/BuildingCodes. The Department of Water Resources Building Code Project Engineer can be contacted at 916-574-1451. The Central Valley Flood Control Board Chief Engineer can be contacted at 916-574-0609. The California Emergency Management Agency Inland Region Program Manager can be contacted at 916-845-8488.

AY109.2 AY109.2 Appeals. Appeals.

When a request for an alternate means of protection has been denied by the building official, the applicant may file a written appeal with the board of appeals. In considering such appeal, the board of appeals may provide additional information to, and request additional written statements from the Central Valley Flood Protection Board, the California Department of Water Resources and the California Emergency Management Agency. If such additional written statements are provided, the board of appeals shall consider those statements.

