ARRANGEMENT AND FORMAT OF THE 2021 IRC

The IRC is divided into nine main parts, specifically: Part I—Administrative, Part II—Definitions, Part III—Building Planning and Construction, Part IV—Energy Conservation, Part V—Mechanical, Part VI—Fuel Gas, Part VII—Plumbing, Part VIII—Electrical and Part IX—Referenced Standards.

The following provides a brief description of the content of each chapter and appendix of the IRC:

Chapter 1 Scope and Administration

This chapter contains provisions for the application, enforcement and administration of subsequent requirements of the code. In addition to establishing the scope of the code, Chapter 1 identifies which buildings and structures come under its purview. Chapter 1 is largely concerned with maintaining “due process of law” in enforcing the building criteria contained in the body of the code. Only through careful observation of the administrative provisions can the building official reasonably expect to demonstrate that “equal protection under the law” has been provided.

Chapter 2 Definitions

Terms defined in the code are listed alphabetically in Chapter 2. It is important to note that three chapters have their own definitions sections: Chapter 11 for the defined terms unique to energy conservation, Chapter 24 for the defined terms unique to fuel gas and Chapter 35 for the terms applicable to electrical Chapters 34 through 43. Where Chapter 24 or 35 defines a term differently than it is defined in Chapter 2, the definition applies in that chapter only. Chapter 2 definitions apply in all other locations in the code.

Where understanding a term’s definition is key to or necessary for understanding a particular code provision, the term is shown in italics where it appears in the code. This is true only for those terms that have a meaning that is unique to the code. In other words, the generally understood meaning of a term or phrase might not be sufficient or consistent with the meaning prescribed by the code; therefore, it is essential that the code-defined meaning be known.

Guidance regarding not only tense, gender and plurality of defined terms, but also terms not defined in this code, is provided.

Chapter 3 Building Planning

Chapter 3 provides guidelines for a minimum level of structural integrity, life safety, fire safety and livability for inhabitants of dwelling units regulated by this code. Chapter 3 is a compilation of the code requirements specific to the building planning sector of the design and construction process. This chapter sets forth code requirements dealing with light, ventilation, sanitation, minimum room size, ceiling height and environmental comfort. Chapter 3 establishes life-safety provisions including limitations on glazing used in hazardous areas, specifications on stairways, use of guards at elevated surfaces, window and fall protection, and rules for means of egress. Snow, wind and seismic design live and dead loads and flood-resistant construction, as well as solar energy systems, and swimming pools, spas and hot tubs, are addressed in this chapter.

Chapter 4 Foundations

Chapter 4 provides the requirements for the design and construction of foundation systems for buildings regulated by this code. Provisions for seismic load, flood load and frost protection are contained in this chapter. A foundation system consists of two interdependent components: the foundation structure itself and the supporting soil.

The prescriptive provisions of this chapter provide requirements for constructing footings and walls for foundations of wood, masonry, concrete and precast concrete. In addition to a foundation’s ability to support the required design loads, this chapter addresses several other factors that can affect foundation performance. These include controlling surface water and subsurface drainage, requiring soil tests where conditions warrant and evaluating proximity to slopes and minimum depth requirements. The chapter also provides requirements to minimize adverse effects of moisture, decay and pests in basements and crawl spaces.

Chapter 5 Floors

Chapter 5 provides the requirements for the design and construction of floor systems that will be capable of supporting minimum required design loads. This chapter covers four different types: wood floor framing, wood floors on the ground, cold-formed steel floor framing and concrete slabs on the ground. Allowable span tables are provided that greatly simplify the determination of joist, girder and sheathing sizes for raised floor systems of wood framing and cold-formed steel framing. This chapter also contains prescriptive requirements for wood-framed exterior decks and their attachment to the main building.

Chapter 6 Wall Construction

Chapter 6 contains provisions that regulate the design and construction of walls. The wall construction covered in Chapter 6 consists of five different types: wood framed, cold-formed steel framed, masonry, concrete and structural insulated panel (SIP). The primary concern of this chapter is the structural integrity of wall construction and transfer of all imposed loads to the supporting structure. This chapter provides the requirements for the design and construction of wall systems that are capable of supporting the minimum design vertical loads (dead, live and snow loads) and lateral loads (wind or seismic loads). This chapter contains the prescriptive requirements for wall bracing and/or shear walls to resist the imposed lateral loads due to wind and seismic activity.

Chapter 6 also regulates exterior windows and doors installed in walls. This chapter contains criteria for the performance of exterior windows and doors and includes provisions for testing and labeling, garage doors, windborne debris protection and anchorage details.

Chapter 7 Wall Covering

Chapter 7 contains provisions for the design and construction of interior and exterior wall coverings. This chapter establishes the various types of materials, materials standards and methods of application permitted for use as interior coverings, including interior plaster, gypsum board, ceramic tile, wood veneer paneling, hardboard paneling, wood shakes and wood shingles. Chapter 7 also contains requirements for the use of vapor retarders for moisture control in walls.

Exterior wall coverings provide the weather-resistant exterior envelope that protects the building’s interior from the elements. Chapter 7 provides the requirements for wind resistance and water-resistive barrier for exterior wall coverings. This chapter prescribes the exterior wall coverings as well as the water-resistive barrier required beneath the exterior materials. Exterior wall coverings regulated by this section include aluminum, stone and masonry veneer, wood, hardboard, particleboard, wood structural panel siding, wood shakes and shingles, exterior plaster, steel, vinyl, fiber cement and exterior insulation finish systems.

Chapter 8 Roof-ceiling Construction

Chapter 8 regulates the design and construction of roof-ceiling systems. This chapter contains two roof-ceiling framing systems: wood framing and cold-formed steel framing. Allowable span tables are provided to simplify the selection of rafter and ceiling joist size for wood roof framing and cold-formed steel framing. Chapter 8 also provides requirements for the application of ceiling finishes, the proper ventilation of concealed spaces in roofs (e.g., enclosed attics and rafter spaces), unvented attic assemblies and attic access.

Chapter 9 Roof Assemblies

Chapter 9 regulates the design and construction of roof assemblies. A roof assembly includes the roof deck, vapor retarder, substrate or thermal barrier, insulation, vapor retarder and roof covering. This chapter provides the requirement for wind resistance of roof coverings.

The types of roof covering materials and installation regulated by Chapter 9 are: asphalt shingles, clay and concrete tile, metal roof shingles, mineral-surfaced roll roofing, slate and slate-type shingles, wood shakes and shingles, built-up roofs, metal roof panels, modified bitumen roofing, thermoset and thermoplastic single-ply roofing, sprayed polyurethane foam roofing, liquid applied coatings and photovoltaic shingles. Chapter 9 also provides requirements for roof drainage, flashing, above deck thermal insulation, rooftop-mounted photovoltaic systems and recovering or replacing an existing roof covering.

Chapter 10 Chimneys and Fireplaces

Chapter 10 contains requirements for the safe construction of masonry chimneys and fireplaces and establishes the standards for the use and installation of factory-built chimneys, fireplaces and masonry heaters. Chimneys and fireplaces constructed of masonry rely on prescriptive requirements for the details of their construction; the factory-built type relies on the listing and labeling method of approval. Chapter 10 provides the requirements for seismic reinforcing and anchorage of masonry fireplaces and chimneys.

Chapter 11 [RE] Energy Efficiency

Chapter 11 is not adopted in California. See California Energy Code, Title 24, Part 6.

Chapter 12 Mechanical Administration

Chapter 12 is not adopted in California. See California Mechanical Code, Title 24, Part 4.

Chapter 13 General Mechanical System Requirements

Chapter 13 is not adopted in California. See California Mechanical Code, Title 24, Part 4.

Chapter 14 Heating and Cooling Equipment and Appliances

Chapter 14 is not adopted in California. See California Mechanical Code, Title 24, Part 4.

Chapter 15 Exhaust Systems

Chapter 15 is not adopted in California. See California Mechanical Code, Title 24, Part 4.

Chapter 16 Duct Systems

Chapter 16 is not adopted in California. See California Mechanical Code, Title 24, Part 4.

Chapter 17 Combustion Air

Chapter 17 is not adopted in California. See California Mechanical Code, Title 24, Part 4.

Chapter 18 Chimneys and Vents

Chapter 18 is not adopted in California. See California Mechanical Code, Title 24, Part 4.

Chapter 19 Special Appliances, Equipment and Systems

Chapter 19 is not adopted in California. See California Mechanical Code, Title 24, Part 4.

Chapter 20 Boilers and Water Heaters

Chapter 20 is not adopted in California. See California Mechanical Code, Title 24, Part 4.

Chapter 21 Hydronic Piping

Chapter 21 is not adopted in California. See California Mechanical Code, Title 24, Part 4.

Chapter 22 Special Piping and Storage Systems

Chapter 22 is not adopted in California. See California Mechanical Code, Title 24, Part 4.

Chapter 23 Solar Thermal Energy Systems

Chapter 23 is not adopted in California. See California Mechanical Code, Title 24, Part 4.

Chapter 24 Fuel Gas

Chapter 24 is not adopted in California. See California Mechanical Code and California Plumbing Code, Title 24, Parts 4 and 5.

Chapter 25 Plumbing Administration

Chapter 25 is not adopted in California. See California Plumbing Code, Title 24, Part 5.

Chapter 26 General Plumbing Requirements

Chapter 26 is not adopted in California. See California Plumbing Code, Title 24, Part 5.

Chapter 27 Plumbing Fixtures

Chapter 27 is not adopted in California. See California Plumbing Code, Title 24, Part 5.

Chapter 28 Water Heaters

Chapter 28 is not adopted in California. See California Plumbing Code, Title 24, Part 5.

Chapter 29 Water Supply and Distribution

Chapter 29 is not adopted in California. See California Plumbing Code, Title 24, Part 5.

Chapter 30 Sanitary Drainage

Chapter 30 is not adopted in California. See California Plumbing Code, Title 24, Part 5.

Chapter 31 Vents

Chapter 31 is not adopted in California. See California Plumbing Code, Title 24, Part 5.

Chapter 32 Traps

Chapter 32 is not adopted in California. See California Plumbing Code, Title 24, Part 5.

Chapter 33 Storm Drainage

Chapter 33 is not adopted in California. See California Plumbing Code, Title 24, Part 5.

Chapter 34 General Requirements

Chapter 34 is not adopted in California. See California Electrical Code, Title 24, Part 3.

Chapter 35 Electrical Definitions

Chapter 35 is not adopted in California. See California Electrical Code, Title 24, Part 3.

Chapter 36 Services

Chapter 36 is not adopted in California. See California Electrical Code, Title 24, Part 3.

Chapter 37 Branch Circuit and Feeder Requirements

Chapter 37 is not adopted in California. See California Electrical Code, Title 24, Part 3.

Chapter 38 Wiring Methods

Chapter 38 is not adopted in California. See California Electrical Code, Title 24, Part 3.

Chapter 39 Power and Lighting Distribution

Chapter 39 is not adopted in California. See California Electrical Code, Title 24, Part 3.

Chapter 40 Devices and Luminaires

Chapter 40 is not adopted in California. See California Electrical Code, Title 24, Part 3.

Chapter 41 Appliance Installation

Chapter 41 is not adopted in California. See California Electrical Code, Title 24, Part 3.

Chapter 42 Swimming Pools

Chapter 42 is not adopted in California. See California Electrical Code, Title 24, Part 3.

Chapter 43 Class 2 Remote-control, Signaling and Power-limited Circuits

Chapter 43 is not adopted in California. See California Electrical Code, Title 24, Part 3.

Chapter 44 Referenced Standards

The code contains numerous references to standards that are used to regulate materials and methods of construction. Chapter 44 contains a comprehensive list of all standards that are referenced in the code. The standards are part of the code to the extent of the reference to the standard. Compliance with the referenced standard is necessary for compliance with this code. By providing specifically adopted standards, the construction and installation requirements necessary for compliance with the code can be readily determined. The basis for code compliance is, therefore, established and available on an equal basis to the code official, contractor, designer and owner.

Chapter 44 is organized in a manner that makes it easy to locate specific standards. It lists all of the referenced standards, alphabetically, by acronym of the promulgating agency of the standard. Each agency’s standards are then listed in either alphabetical or numeric order based upon the standard identification. The list also contains the title of the standard; the edition (date) of the standard referenced; any addenda included as part of the ICC adoption; and the section or sections of this code that reference the standard.

Appendix AA Reserved

Appendix AB Reserved

Appendix AC Reserved

Appendix AD Reserved

Appendix AE Reserved

Appendix AF Radon Control Methods

Radon comes from the natural (radioactive) decay of the element radium in soil, rock and water and finds its way into the air. Appendix AF contains requirements to mitigate the transfer of radon gases from the soil into the dwelling. The provisions of this appendix regulate the design and construction of radon-resistant measures intended to reduce the entry of radon gases into the living space of residential buildings.

Appendix AG Reserved

Appendix AH Patio Covers

Appendix AH sets forth the regulations and limitations for patio covers. The provisions address those uses permitted in patio cover structures, the minimum design loads to be assigned for structural purposes, and the effect of the patio cover on egress and emergency escape or rescue from sleeping rooms. This appendix also contains the special provisions for aluminum screen enclosures in hurricane-prone regions.

Appendix AI Private Sewage Disposal

Appendix AI simply provides the opportunity to utilize the International Private Sewage Disposal Code for the design and installation of private sewage disposal in one- and two-family dwellings.

Appendix AJ Existing Buildings and Structures

Appendix AJ contains the provisions for the repair, renovation, alteration and reconstruction of existing buildings and structures that are within the scope of this code. To accomplish this objective and to make the rehabilitation process more available, this appendix allows for a controlled departure from full code compliance without compromising minimum life safety, fire safety, structural and environmental features of the rehabilitated existing building or structure.

Appendix AK Sound Transmission

Appendix AK regulates the sound transmission of wall and floor-ceiling assemblies separating dwelling units and townhouse units. Airborne sound insulation is required for walls. Airborne sound insulation and impact sound insulation are required for floor-ceiling assemblies. The provisions in Appendix AK set forth a minimum Sound Transmission Class (STC) rating for common walls and floor-ceiling assemblies between dwelling units. In addition, a minimum Impact Insulation Class (IIC) rating is also established to limit structureborne sound through common floor-ceiling assemblies separating dwelling units.

Appendix AL Permit Fees

Appendix AL provides guidance to jurisdictions for setting appropriate permit fees. This appendix will aid many jurisdictions to assess permit fees that will assist to fairly and properly administer the code. This appendix can be used for informational purposes only or may be adopted when specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

Appendix AM Reserved

Appendix AN Reserved

Appendix AO Automatic Vehicular Gates

Appendix AO provides the requirements for the design and construction of automatic vehicular gates. The provisions are for where automatic gates are installed for use at a vehicular entrance or exit on the lot of a one- or two-family dwelling. The requirements provide protection for individuals from potential entrapment between an automatic gate and a stationary object or surface.

Appendix AP Reserved

Appendix AQ Tiny Houses

For dwelling units that are 400 square feet (37 m2) or less in floor area, excluding lofts, Appendix AQ provides relaxed provisions as compared to those in the body of the code. These provisions primarily address reduced ceiling heights for loft areas and specific stair and ladder detail requirements that allow for more compact designs where accessing lofts.

Appendix AR Light Straw-clay Construction

This appendix regulates the use of light straw-clay as a construction material. It is limited in application to nonbearing wall infill systems.

Appendix AS Strawbale Construction

This appendix provides prescriptive requirements for the use of strawbale as a construction material. It is limited in application to the walls of one-story structures, except where additional engineering is provided.

Appendix AT Solar-ready Provisions—Detached One- and Two-family Dwellings and Townhouses

This appendix provides requirements for preparation of a house for future installation of solar equipment for electrical power or heating. Given the growing popularity of solar power and the possible need for the equipment in the future, this appendix, if adopted, would require an area be provided on the building roof that would accommodate solar equipment. In addition, pathways for routing of plumbing and conduit need to be provided.

Appendix AU Cob Construction (Monolithic Adobe)

This appendix provides prescriptive requirements for the use of natural cob (monolithic adobe) as a construction material. It is limited in application to the walls of one-story structures, except where additional engineering is provided.

Appendix AV Board of Appeals

This appendix provides criteria for Board of Appeals members and procedures by which the Board of Appeals should conduct its business.

Appendix AW 3D-printed Building Construction

Appendix AW provides for the design, construction and inspection of buildings, structures and building elements fabricated by 3D-printed construction techniques.

Appendix AX Swimming Pool Safety Act

Appendix AX provides the language of the Swimming Pool Safety Act for the code user’s convenience.

Appendix AY Areas Protected by the Facilities of the Central Valley Flood Protection Plan

Appendix AY provides the provisions for areas protected by the facilities of the Central Valley Flood Protection Plan.

Appendix AZ Emergency Housing

Appendix AZ provides the provisions for emergency housing and emergency housing facilities.

