CHAPTER 8-2 DEFINITIONS

SECTION 8-201 DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of the CHBC, certain terms and phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this chapter. Additional definitions and/or terms may appear in the various other chapters relative to terms or phrases primarily applicable thereto. Any reference to “authority having jurisdiction” does not necessarily preclude the appellate process of Section 8-104.3.

ADDITION. A nonhistorical extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or property.

ALTERATION. A modification to a qualified historical building or property that affects the usability of the building or property, or part thereof. Alterations include, but are not limited to, remodeling, renovation, rehabilitation, reconstruction, historical restoration, changes or rearrangement of the structural parts or elements, and changes or rearrangements in the plan configuration of walls and full-height partitions.

BUILDING STANDARD. Any guideline, regulation or code that may be applied to a qualified historical building or property.

CHARACTER-DEFINING FEATURE. Those visual aspects and physical elements that comprise the appearance of a historical building or property, and that are significant to its historical, architectural and cultural values, including the overall shape of the historical building or property, its materials, craftsmanship, decorative details, interior spaces and features, as well as the various aspects of its site and environment.

CULTURAL RESOURCE. Building, site, property, object or district evaluated as having significance in prehistory or history.

DISTINCT HAZARD. Any clear and evident condition that exists as an immediate danger to the safety of the occupants or public right of way. Conditions that do not meet the requirements of current regular codes and ordinances do not, of themselves, constitute a distinct hazard. Section 8-104.3, SHBC appeals, remains applicable.

ENFORCING AGENCY, Authority Having Jurisdiction, Local Agency with Jurisdiction. An entity with the responsibility for regulating, enforcing, reviewing or otherwise that exerts control of or administration over the process of granting permits, approvals, decisions, variances, appeals for qualified historical buildings or properties.

EXIT LADDER DEVICE. An exit ladder device is a permanently installed, fixed, folding, retractable or hinged ladder intended for use as a means of emergency egress from areas of the second or third stories. Unless approved specifically for a longer length, the ladder shall be limited to 25 feet (7620 mm) in length. Exit ladders are permitted where the area served by the ladder has an occupant load less than 10 persons.

FIRE HAZARD. Any condition which increases or may contribute to an increase in the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than customarily recognized by the authority having jurisdiction, or any condition or act which could obstruct, delay, hinder or interfere with the operations of fire-fighting personnel or the egress of occupants in the event of fire. Section 8-104.3, SHBC appeals, remains applicable.

HISTORICAL FABRIC OR MATERIALS. Original and later-added historically significant construction materials, architectural finishes or elements in a particular pattern or configuration which form a qualified historical property, as determined by the authority having jurisdiction.

HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE. Importance for which a property has been evaluated and found to be historical, as determined by the authority having jurisdiction.

IMMINENT THREAT. Any condition within or affecting a qualified historical building or property which, in the opinion of the authority having jurisdiction, would qualify a building or property as dangerous to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public, its occupants or those performing necessary repair, stabilization or shoring work are in immediate peril due to conditions affecting the building or property. Potential hazards to persons using, or improvements within, the right-of-way may not be construed to be “imminent threats” solely for that reason if the hazard can be mitigated by shoring, stabilization, barricades or temporary fences.

INTEGRITY. Authenticity of a building or property’s historical identity, evidenced by the survival of physical characteristics that existed during the property’s historical or prehistorical period of significance.

LIFE-SAFETY EVALUATION. An evaluation of the life-safety hazards of a qualified historical building or property based on procedures similar to those contained in NFPA 909, Standard for the Protection of Cultural Resources, Appendix B, Fire Risk Assessment in Heritage Premises.

LIFE SAFETY HAZARD. See Distinct Hazard.

PERIOD OF SIGNIFICANCE. The period of time when a qualified historical building or property was associated with important events, activities or persons, or attained the characteristics for its listing or registration.

PRESERVATION. The act or process of applying measures necessary to sustain the existing form, integrity and materials of a qualified historical building or property. Work, including preliminary measures to protect and stabilize the property, generally focuses upon the ongoing maintenance and repair of historic materials and features rather than extensive replacement and new construction. New exterior additions are not within the scope of this treatment; however, the limited and sensitive upgrading of mechanical, electrical and plumbing systems and other code-related work to make properties functional is appropriate within a preservation project.

QUALIFIED HISTORICAL BUILDING OR PROPERTY. As defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18955 as “Qualified Historical Building or Property.” Any building, site, object, place, location, district or collection of structures, and their associated sites, deemed of importance to the history, architecture or culture of an area by an appropriate local, state or federal governmental jurisdiction. This shall include historical buildings or properties on, or determined eligible for, national, state or local historical registers or inventories, such as the National Register of Historic Places, California Register of Historical Resources, State Historical Landmarks, State Points of Historical Interest, and city or county registers, inventories or surveys of historical or architecturally significant sites, places or landmarks.

RECONSTRUCTION. The act or process of depicting, by means of new construction, the form, features and detailing of a nonsurviving site, landscape, building, property or object for the purpose of replicating its appearance at a specific period of time.

REGULAR CODE. The adopted regulations that govern the design and construction or alteration of nonhistorical buildings and properties within the jurisdiction of the enforcing agency.

REHABILITATION. The act or process of making possible a compatible use for qualified historical building or property through repair, alterations and additions while preserving those portions or features which convey its qualified historical, cultural or architectural values.

RELOCATION. The act or process of moving any qualified historical building or property or a portion of a qualified historical building or property to a new site, or a different location on the same site.

REPAIR. Renewal, reconstruction or renovation of any portion of an existing property, site or building for the purpose of its continued use.

RESTORATION. The act or process of accurately depicting the form, features and character of a qualified building or property as it appeared at a particular period of time by the means of the removal of features from other periods in its history and reconstruction of missing features from the restoration period. The limited and sensitive upgrading of mechanical, electrical and plumbing systems and other code-required work to make properties functional is appropriate within a restoration project.

STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or a building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.

TREATMENT. An act of work to carry out preservation, restoration, stabilization, rehabilitation or reconstruction.

