

The background of the California Historical Building Code can be traced to December 1973, when the State Department of Parks and Recreation published the California History Plan, Volume I, in which Recommendation No. 11 was proposed by the then California Landmarks Advisory Committee (later to become The State Historical Resources Commission). This proposal expressed a need for a new building code to meet the intent of protecting the public health and safety and also retain “enough flexibility to allow restoration of a Historic feature while still retaining its Historic integrity.” No. 11 of this History Plan supported this need by stating that “. . . restoration . . . is frequently made difficult by unnecessarily rigid interpretation of building . . . codes.”

In March of 1974, the Landmarks Committee by resolution recommended that the Director of the State Department of Parks and Recreation and the State Architect initiate a study to develop this needed code. These two officials accepted this concept and jointly called a statewide meeting in Sacramento on May 14th of that year. Attending were representatives from both the public and private sectors, such as members of the building industry, design professions, local and state building officials, and others interested in this problem.

Out of this open conference, a steering committee was formed to explore in depth the ways and means of implementing the new historical building code concept. This ad hoc committee was chaired by a representative from the California Council, American Institute of Architects and composed of a comprehensive cross section of the professional organizations and government agencies concerned with design and code enforcement.

Meetings began late in 1974 and continued into early 1975. By April of that year, a legislative subcommittee of the ad hoc group drafted a sample bill for the proposed code and requested that it be carried by Senator James R. Mills, President Pro Tempore of the Senate. After further development and refinement, the enacting legislation to create the authority for the code and an advisory board to prepare regulations to implement it (SB 927, Mills) was supported by both the legislature and the public. It was signed by the governor in September 1975, and became effective January 1, 1976.

The members of the advisory board, which were required by law to include local and state building officials, individuals from the building industry and design professions, as well as representatives from city and county governments, were appointed and held their first session in Sacramento, February 24, 1976. This Board’s duties included the preparation of code regulations and the review of specific historic building cases, when officially requested by governing bodies.

Several of the Board’s members were a part of the original ad hoc steering committee and thus provided a continuity and smooth transition from the inception of the code’s philosophy to its pragmatic implementation in these performance–oriented regulations.

The first comprehensive regulations were codified in August and October 1979, after years of careful deliberation. Those regulations allowed all jurisdictions to utilize them at their discretion in replacing or modifying details of prevailing prescriptive codes.

Changes made in law in 1984 and 1991, and to the code, make the application of the California Historical Building Code statutes and regulations applicable for all agencies and at the discretion of the owner for local jurisdictions when dealing with qualified historical buildings.

These current performance regulations were adopted by the Board on June 23, 1998, and approved by the California Building Standards Commission on December 12, 2013.

