

The California Historical Building Code (CHBC) is unique among state regulations. The authoring of the original CHBC required state agencies promulgating regulations for building construction to work in harmony with representatives of other design and construction disciplines. The result was a totally new approach to building codes for historical structures, which maintains currently acceptable life–safety standards.

These regulations are also unique in that they are performance oriented rather than prescriptive. The provisions of the CHBC are to be applied by the enforcing authority of every city, county, city and county, or state agency in permitting repairs, alterations and additions necessary for the preservation, rehabilitation, relocation, related construction, change of use or continued use of a qualified historical building.

The authority for use of the CHBC is vested in Sections 18950 through 18961 of the Health and Safety Code. Section 18954 states, “The building department of every city or county shall apply the provisions of alternative building standards and building regulations adopted by the CHBC Board pursuant to Section 18959.5 in permitting repairs, alterations and additions necessary for the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation, moving or continued use of an historical building or structure. A state agency shall apply the alternative building regulations adopted by the CHBC Board pursuant to Section 18959.5 in permitting repairs, alterations and additions necessary for the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation, moving or continued use of an historical building or structure.”

However, be aware that in order to use the CHBC, the structure under consideration must be qualified by being designated as an historical building or structure. Section 18955 states, “For the purposes of this part, a qualified historical building or structure is any structure or collection of structures, and their associated sites deemed of importance to the history, architecture or culture of an area by an appropriate local or state governmental jurisdiction. This shall include structures on existing or future national, state or local historical registers or official inventories, such as the National Register of Historic Places, State Historical Landmarks, State Points of Historical Interest, and city or county registers or inventories of historical or architecturally significant sites, places, historic districts or landmarks.”

The regulations of the CHBC have the same authority as state law and are to be considered as such. Liability is the same as for prevailing law.

The intent of the CHBC is to save California’s architectural heritage by recognizing the unique construction problems inherent in historical buildings and by providing a code to deal with these problems.

